![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/WASI.png)

## Agenda: April 20 WASI video call

- **Where**: zoom.us (see Registration below)
- **When**: April 20, 16:00-17:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Lin Clark
  - Email: lclark@fastly.com

### Registration

If this is your first time attending, please [fill out the registration form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpO6Lp2L_dZ2_oiDgzjKx7pb7s2YYHjeSIyfHWZZGSKoZKWQ/viewform?usp=sf_link) to receive an invite.

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Request stage 1 vote for `wasi-pattern-match` -- 5 minutes (refer to @jianjunz's previously
       presented [slides](presentations/2023-03-23-wasi-pattern-match.pdf))
    1. Adding an initial current working directory to wasi-filesystem (Dan Gohman)
        - https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-filesystem/issues/24

## Notes
### Attendees
- Pat Hickey
- Dan Chiarlone (danbugs)
- Lin Clark
- Jeff Charles
- Bailey Hayes
- Dave Bakker
- Chris Suszynski (cardil)
- Chris Woods
- Piotr Sarna
- Brian Hardock
- Shivansh Vij
- Johnnie Birch
- Jianjun Zhu
- Andrew Brown
- Steve Schoettler
- Dan Gohman
- Piotr Sikora
- Stephen Doyle
- Mingqiu Sun
- Yong He

### Request stage 1 vote for wasi-pattern-match

**Chris Suszynski:** Question about how many proposals are being proposed. Problem for runtimes to implement large scope

**Lin Clark:** This is where worlds come in. Can just limit to a subset of interfaces in the world, and the runtime only needs to support the world.

**Pat Hickey:** This poses a communication problem. We don’t yet have worlds. For this one, this can be written in pure WebAssembly so it can be virtualized, so not really an issue.

**Chris Woods:** I’d second that concern. Concern about fragmentation. Some discussion around a repository of components. Some thought into having a consolidated set of worlds, and some base APIs around them. Worthwhile having a discussion on that at some point, probably not today. What kind of developer experience.

**Pat Hickey:** I agree, something I and others are actively working on. What I believe is first preview 2 implementation. All the basic. So there is a core set of things like std-io being available. And clocks. There does need to be some kind of idea that there is a core base that we expect a whole bunch of languages to target. We’ll come up with that world at some point. Haven’t really figured out the exact details.

**Bailey Hayes:** I just wanted to add. I agree with Andrew (message in chat) that this is an awesome problem to have. Just wanted to call out that virtualization, as Pat said, it makes it really easy to adapt. For a ton of these, where syscall isn’t 100% required, this is great. I’ve been asking for this one, have been asking if people would use as a syscall, and for this have been hearing a lot of yeses.

**Andrew Brown:** Yeah, I don’t think stage 1 would be blocked. Maybe not in default world, but this is just about getting a repo.

**Chris Suszynski:** Wondering whether it’s useful to add as a field to the template whether certain proposals should be virtualizable

**Andrew Brown:** I think for this particular one, we should explain virtualizability in the README

**Pat Hickey:** One tricky part is that this is a standards body, but implementation isn’t the scope of this group. Those are the bounds we have to stay in as a standards body.

**Chris Woods:** Need to put some thought into the developer experience. If the standards become too many or too confusing. Base world.

**Pat Hickey:** Happy to discuss that offline. Email address is in all my commit messages.

**Shivansh Vij:** Fallback syscall… there’s very little incentive to not create overlapping syscalls that focus on very specific use cases. Way to standardize against that? (bailey adds “Best practices”). Yeah, best practices.

**Pat Hickey:** I agree and I think the purpose of these very early votes is to establish whether it’s in scope

**Lin Clark:** Don’t have to collapse the decision space in the early stages

**Pat Hickey:** Agree. One other point for those who haven’t been involved in the Wasm CG. Only a few of the Wasm CG proposals have made it. Some take a long time, some get explicitly cancelled. So an early Stage 1 decision doesn’t guarantee that this makes it to standard. We need to find ways to make sure we communicate these early stage proposals could go nowhere.

**Dave Bakker:** Wondering where the WebSQL standards fall, where SQLite became dominant. Because there was no way to specify.

**Lin Clark:** Tension to figure out. This is where the design phase comes in. We'd need to push back on anything that doesn't meet WASI's constraints.

**Pat Hickey:** Agree, if there is only PCRE then I’d say no.

**Andrew Brown:** It will be a subset of PCRE 2

**Pat Hickey:** Yes, and something that we’ll need to make sure is well standardized. We’ve run into this at our company, the fact that the entirety of PCRE has just one implementation, and the spec is just however that one implementation works. Carving off a smaller part of that spec so that there is a strong spec and multiple credible implementations is hard work, Fastly has spent 10s of engineer years working on those problems. I do believe solutions can be found to this problem, but its going to be work. We’ll spend Stage 1 working on that.

**Andrew Brown:** Seems to me that these are good sections to put in the README

**Jianjun Zhu:** Yes, and once we have the repo we can better define the API.

**Lin Clark:** Poll. Success!

### Adding an initial current working directory to wasi-filesystem

**Dan Gohman:** Adding a string to the pre-opens. If present, it would be essentially an initial working directory. Add an optional string in preview 2. Unclear on how to do it in preview 1 in a way that wouldn’t break existing code

**Lin Clark:** Yeah, let’s not break preview 1.

**Dan Gohman:** Agreed. So there’s an issue open, let’s do this.

### wasi-nn announcement: change needing feedback

**Andrew Brown:** Quick announcement. Want to solicit feedback on a change we’ve been discussing with Matthew from Fastly.

- [issue](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-nn/issues/36)
- [PR](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-nn/pull/38)

Only way to load a model is to get all the bytes together and pass to a load. Those models can be very large. That ends up being the largest amount of time you spend. Now we’re at a place where we want to load models a lot more quickly. Discussing named models. Ability to register a model and give it a name, then load the model by name. That means you dont’ need to retrieve the model bytes again.

Planning to make this change soon, let me know if any concerns.

**Dan Gohman:** Only concern is the name. At first, was global namespace, but you said that was also a problem for you.

**Andrew Brown:** Matthew and I met with Pat to work through what to say in the spec about the scope fo the names. Decided spec shouldn’t say when they are available. The host should make that decision. Should only guarantee in the current instance.

**Dan Gohman:** There’s an instance called link time authority. Is that right?

**Andrew Brown:** Probably need to explain that more. Let’s take offline.
