![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the November video call of WebAssembly's Garbage Collection Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: January 25, 5pm-6pm UTC (January 25, 9am-11am Pacific Daylight Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Fill out the form here to sign up if
it's your first time: https://forms.gle/JehrAB4gWbtHjybt9. The meeting is open
to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
      1. Discussion: prerequisite proposals (Thomas Lively, 20 minutes)
      1. Discussion: preparing for phase 2 (Thomas Lively, 30 minutes)
1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

- Thomas Lively
- Sergey Rubanov
- Aske Simon Christensen
- Francis McCabe
- Sabine Schmaltz
- Conrad Watt
- Manos Koukoutos
- Ben Titzer
- Lars Hansen
- Rick Battagline
- Derek Schuff
- Adam Klein
- Jakob Kummerow
- Alon Zakai
- Andreas Rossberg
- Deepti Gandluri
- Luke Wagner
- Ryan Hunt
- Emanuel Ziegler
- Zalim Bashorov
- Asumu Takikawa
- Michael Knyszek
- Igor Iakovlev


### Discussion: prerequisite proposals (Thomas Lively, 20 minutes)

TL: Filed an issue against typed function references about merging it back into GC since it doesn't seem likely to ship independently, thinking that it would simplify maintaining the spec formalism.

AR: I’m for keeping it as is, hygiene reasons as well as other dependencies. Better to keep it clean, and unrelated proposals depending on the GC proposals. Even from the organizational purpose, may cost more to try to merge it in than keeping it separate. 

TL: Happy to keep with the status quo if you think that'd be simpler, especially since it'd mostly be AR's work that would be potentially made simpler.

TL: The Type Imports/Exports proposal may be a prerequisite for GC, anything to do with that?

AR: Don’t think it has to be, practically it depends. If we go with structural types with no dependencies, but if we go with nominal types then we definitely need it.

TL: This came up on the eq type discussion, and generally it seems like type imports can leak into other discussions that don't really need to address them. So if they're not needed by the GC MVP proposal, I'd prefer to defer work on type imports and not block any GC work on them.

AR: Agree, if that is possible then it’s a plus.

TL: Anyone else have any concerns about deferring type imports to a post MVP feature?

AR: Technically no dependency either way. In reality, there’s quite a few open questions. Makes sense in terms of timelines. 

TL: Has anyone prototyped or used type imports anywhere?

BT: Have prototyped something, but it’s significantly different from whats there.

ASC: Type dimensions discussion ties in with type imports, so it's relevant there.

AR: That’s an example of forward compatibility. Type imports are just one example. Generics or type parameters have a lot of similarities, the factorization would be similar. Some things are affected, what we want to do are type imports but they are more clarifying structures. 

TL: I'd like to err on the side of not trying to predict the future and be forward-compatible. That is, I'd like the decision to defer work on type imports to imply that we don't have to consider type imports in GC MVP design decisions.

AR: Except that when you p[aint yourself in the corner it will be hard to make it work. I think it depends, don’t want to plan for everything in the future, but it should depend on a case by case basis. Some things may be more clear than the others.

BT: Taking those two in account, I think we need criteria to help decide when we need to design for the future. And I think those should be: are there use-cases? Don't want to build features without use-cases.

AR: I guess everyone agrees with that

CW: There are broad strokes things we still need to decide - type dimensions could be a discussion for after phase 2. 

AR: Agreed

BT: Is it a prerequisite for phase 2 to decide nominal vs structural?

TL: This is the topic for the second half of the meeting. That is the key question I would like to settle for phase 2: however subtyping & identity works, and everything else is smaller details.

AR: Agree, this is by far the most cross cutting decision we have to make that affects the big picture of the proposal. Everyone seems to agree that this is something we should do.

BT: Agree with that assessment, good motivator to settle these questions.

TL: Are there other things people would want to settle before phase 2?

### Discussion: preparing for phase 2 (Thomas Lively, 30 minutes)

AR: Tried to come up with some, not anything that is equally fundamental to this.

CW: Potentially would be nice to have something on separate compilation. So far we've mostly focused on closed-world scenarios, but it's unclear to me if that's because we don't have use-cases for separate compilation or if there were other reasons we wanted to continue to focus on closed-world.

AR: The other thing I brought up was the type annotations story but that could be resolved after Phase 2, how heavily annotated do we want the instructions to be? It affects function references so makes sense to decide sooner rather than later.

BT: Not clear to me whether that needs to be before phase 2.

TL: That's one where we've seen a lot of evidence but we don't seem to be any closer to closing it out.

BT: We have the annotations, or we don't. I'm ok with the status quo.

AR: The status quo is that we have a mix of things: made a decision at the CG to remove annotations, but haven't carried that through the entire instruction set.

BT: MAkes sense to resolve after phase 2. There seem to be bigger issues to resolve.

TL: Can triage issues before phase 2, to close out issues that have been superceded.

CW: Don't necessarily think that separate compilation is a small issue, but I do think we could defer it till after phase 2 if we don't have new data to look at.

AR: More like a meta consideration, it influences some decisions we might make, but doesn’t influence anything directly right now, not sure.

TL: CW, do you see separate compilation as being separate from the type system discussion, where different type system features imply certain separate compilation capabilities?

CW: It’s a question of performance. In a structural world, we’re talking about canonicalization, in the nominal word, name mangling and central coordination work would need engineering work, in the absence of that we could block on Phase 2.

TL: Posted an [issue](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen/issues/4473) on Binaryen around benchmarking the isorecursive hybrid system. My feeling is that if the canonicalization in that proposal performs well (which it should, it seems like it's linear) I don't see a problem with moving forward with that system.

ASC: We want to try out deferred loading scenarios with multiple modules. Partly to see how the iso-recursive system would work. So we have some concrete thing to look at - it’s on our plans,

AR: Is this about expressiveness or performance?

ASC: Mostly expressiveness: how would it work if you had whole-program compilation but creating separate modules and loading them at different times. What works, what falls down?

AR: Makes sense

CW: That sounds like a good thing to have.

TL: ASC we should follow up offline, you might be able to use the wasm-split tool to make that easy.

TL: [reading chat]

AK: [pasted phase 2 entry requirements]: Full proposed English spec text available in a forked repo around which a reasonably high level of consensus exists.

AT (from chat): I don’t think it needs to block phase 2 (other phase 2 proposals like typed funcrefs don’t have a fully hashed out JS API either), but I think figuring out more design details about the JS API would be important once we have consensus on the type system direction.

AR: Originally this was supposed to be spec text, at some meeting we decided to read that as strictly a generally complete english design. We should update the process.

AK: There’s some text below about formal notation..

AR: We should clarify that English text is sufficient.

CW: Certainly true that english text is still formal, and possibly more work to write in the spec itself.

AR: All I'm saying is it would be good to update the process document to match practice. Someone else could do that or I could. Just making a note that we ought to.

AR: The MVP document should be fairly concrete and precise description of the semantics. We have a number of open discussions about what we can add.

TL: Level of detail in the current explainer seems fine when looking at what we've done for other proposals.

AR: Who is owning the JS API right now? Someone was owning that not sure now..
LW: It was a long time ago, don’t mind if anyone takes it over and does whatever they like.

AT: That's a topic I'd be interested in working on. I'm also in TC39 paying attention to the JS structs proposal which is closely related to this.

TL: Agree that, since it would be nice to get to phase 2, I'd rather not block on the JS API for phase 2. And I think that moving the prototyping work forward will give us more opportunity to understand the requirements for the JS API.

TL: Premature for formal polls on any of this stuff. Benchmarking work to do, will come back and give an update on that soon.

AK: Wanted to ask about type imports, is that we want to bring back to the full group to make a decision about the status of that?

AR: Don’t know

AK: IT assumes type imports, not sure if the existing component model depends on it, or anyone in a different proposal depends on it, and would be surprised if it wasn’t moving along.

LW: It’s not a hard dependency.

AR: Why does IT not depend on it anymore? 

LW: Because out spec is layered on top of core Wasm, we can have "type imports" at the IT level, but then in core Wasm with the canonical ABI they end up as i32s into a table.

CW: Does this mean that atv the IT level something looks like the Wasm core spec types? 

LW: Yes, we’re working with AR. They’re resource types.

AR: What if you wanted to lower these to reference types?

LW: Could be a future extension
