![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the November 1 video call of WebAssembly's Garbage Collection Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: November 1, 4pm-5pm UTC (November 1, 9am-11am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Fill out the form here to sign up if
it's your first time: https://forms.gle/JehrAB4gWbtHjybt9. The meeting is open
to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Discussion: Taking stock of remaining issues
1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

- Thomas Lively
- Rick Battagline
- Justin Michaud
- Igor Iakovlev
- Francis McCabe
- Aske Simon Christensen
- Slava Kuzmich
- Ilya Rezvov
- Asumu Takikawa
- dbezhetskov
- Alon Zakai
- Adam Klein
- Zalim Bashorov
- Luke Wagner
- Ryan Hunt
- Yulia Startsev
- Deepti Gandluri
- Conrad Watt

### Discussion: Taking stock of remaining issues

CW: Want to redo br_on_null to make it more consistent - make it propagate null in label

ASC: br_on_non_null: it would be inconvenient to preserve the null. For br_on_null, it’s the other way around, used for null lifting operations. 

CW: We can keep br_on_non_null as not propagating the null because the spec can just describe its behaviour in terms of an extra a drop instruction. Sounds like it’s neutral or slightly helpful to change br_on_null?

ASC: lots of different patterns involved - had to say immediately

RH: Lots of GitHub issues, hard to understand current state.

TL: Agree, we should go through and close more issues.

RH: Lots of big idea issues as well.

TL: Maybe we can close and suggest making a PR to the post-MVP doc.

DG: Can also use labels.

RH: Phase 4 should be blocked on i31 discussion.

TL: Asked OCaml folks for update, can follow up if they don’t respond.

FM: Other uses of i31 as well. ADTs and small number types in functional languages with uniform representation.

TL: If we added Aske’s proposed instructions to MVP, could we use i31 for small integer optimizations in Dart, etc in MVP?

ASC: Full benefit would require union type for sharpening and merging of results. In absence of union type, there would be some extra casts. New instructions would help code size a lot, though.

TL: Would we still see mixed performance or would performance become strictly better?

ASC: Some of the overhead could be eliminated by a more extensive analyses to remove boxing and unboxing. The casts are difficult to avoid because of type system expressivity.

TL: Sounds like this might work to motivate i31 in the MVP, but it’s not a slam dunk. Ryan, what would the bar be for supporting i31 in the MVP if OCaml is using it for multiple things but other languages aren’t?

RH: Would have to think about it more, but my initial impression is that it would be unfortunate if i31 were not used for multiple languages.

FM: Follow-up question: What features for OO languages have not been proposed or included?

RH: Things about method dispatch. A self type, vtables, etc.

FM: Supporting these languages is important. 

CW: method dispatch will be important for post-MVP. There’s a whole package of stuff like self types, type parameters, explicit rtts, or alternatively questions of how to do vtables language-agnostically. Will be high priority post-MVP.

RH: For i31 ref, it’s mostly a timing question. Not trying to kill i31ref, but want it to be properly motivated. Deferring things does delay the MVP, so it’s not something we can do for free. Mostly want to keep momentum up.

ASC: I could also do some more benchmarking, for example with branch-and-convert instructions to see what difference it makes.

CW: I’ll make an issue on br_on_null and tag you on that.

ASC: I just looked at that in dart2wasm. None of them have to rematerialize the null. If it was preserved, it would just be extra drop instructions.

CW: Ah sad.

LW (chat): seeing concrete wins from i32ref for Dart (which would be actually shippable) would be pretty compelling evidence of MVP utility, i'd think

CW: I remember there was a firm belief that we were not going to have subtyping in call_indirect for the MVP. Has anything new come up that makes us believe we need it?

RH: Not that I know of. I think there’s some belief that the subtype check can be made a non-issue. Mostly just for symmetry, not language need.

ASC: Might be able to use it in Dart in some places. But benefit probably not significant.

TL: I’m flexible on this. Would be nice for symmetry if there are no downsides, but if any problems crop up I would be ok not including this in the MVP.

RH: (Details of how this could be performantly implemented) Is the subtyping check too slow to be practical? Don’t know yet. I would prefer not to add it until we have data.

ASC: If exact match case is as fast as otherwise, we should include it, but if there is any slowdown, we should keep it out.

FM: Meta-point, we shouldn’t depend on people complaining to figure out what to do.

CW: Folks have been switching between both, so it would be good to be uniform.

RH: One missing set of issues here is about binary size. Will we do a pass to try to minimize binary size?

TL: Planning to redo opcodes, but not aware of any plans to reduce code size specifically. Could move instructions to non-prefixed space if necessary.

CW: Savings in type definitions seem less important from numbers. Savings in the code section seem much more important. Could we do get-and-cast to save size?

TL: Would want Andreas to be present for a discussion of how much we are willing to add such macro instructions. Then we could look for specific patterns.

LW: Opcode renumbering is basically the same as what brotli does already.

CW: Does it find macros where indices can change?

ASC: Could also change things to make binary more easily compressible.

AZ: Text format?

TL: Yes, had to make up my own abbreviations when writing new parser.

RH: Also had to make up abbreviations.

TL: Will take an AI to start an issue about this.

CW: Also finish conversation about whether rec groups are size one are the same as non-rec-group types.

RH: Also differing limits number of recursion groups and types in a recursion group and types overall. I implemented this to check total limit as we were parsing types.

LW: Any depth limits?

TL: No nested groups, so no issues.

ASC: Maybe include number of total types before vector of recursion groups as well?

TL: Sure, worth discussing.

CW: It’s nice to be discussing such small issues.
