![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the April 3 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: April 3, 4pm-5pm UTC (April 3, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: JF Bastien
    - Email: jfbastien@apple.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email JF Bastien to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. Future in-person meeting: [hosted by Fastly in San Francisco in April](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2018/CG-04.md)
    1. Discussion: Should we drop the APAC timezone video meetings? (Brad
       Nelson)
       * POLL: We should drop the APAC timezone meeting.
    1. Discussion: Could we simplify the meeting signup process? (Brad Nelson)
    1. Create CG sub-groups
       * Following up from last CG meeting with feedback from the W3C
       * [Details](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/issues/191#issuecomment-376171112)
       * Which sub-groups should we start with, and how should they function?
    1. HTML serialization of WebAssembly.Module objects (Daniel Ehrenberg)
       * https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/711
       * Where should this be in the process?
    1. Discussion: Process for assigning opcode numbers (Ben Smith)
       * We have some top-level opcodes left, and prefixes -- how to choose between?
       * Topic came up w/ bulk-memory-operations instructions
       * See [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/bulk-memory-operations/issues/9#issuecomment-376300850)
       * Current polling results:
         * [Use opcode prefix for scarcely used opcodes](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#non-trapping-float-to-int)
         * [Use LEB128 after prefix](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#webassembly-threads-proposal)
         * [Reserve 0xff prefix, count backward from 0xfe](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#webassembly-threads-proposal)
    1. Consider alternate video service?
       * Unicko offers WebRTC based conferencing that apparently scales to 100:
          * https://demo.unicko.com/
          * https://www.unicko.com/pricing
       * Discussion: Should we prefer a WebRTC based solution? Should we try out this service?
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Attendees

* Alon Zakai
* Andreas Rossberg
* Ben Smith
* Bernhard Scholze
* Brad Nelson
* Conrad Watt
* Dan Ehrenberg
* Deepti Gandluri
* Derek Schuff
* Eric Holk
* Heejin Ahn
* JF Bastien
* Jacob Gravelle
* Lars Hansen
* Limin Zhu
* Luke Wagner
* Malcom White
* Mark Miller
* Pat Hickey
* Peter Jensen
* Richard Winterton
* Sam Clegg
* Sean Larkin
* Sean Westfall
* Sergey Rubanov
* Sven Sauleau
* Till Schneidereit
* Tyler McMullen
* Ulrik (?)
* Yury Delendik

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

1. Opening of the meeting
1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

JF volunteers.

1. Adoption of the agenda

Luke seconds.

### Proposals and discussions

#### Review of action items from prior meeting.

Will discuss next week.

#### Future in-person meeting

[Hosted by Fastly in San Francisco in April](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2018/CG-04.md)

#### Drop APAC timezone?

*Brad Nelson*

Discussion: Should we drop the APAC timezone video meetings? We’ve had a couple of iterations, and except for the first meeting we’ve had very few people show up (both for WG and CG video calls).

*POLL*: We should drop the APAC timezone meeting.

*Unanimous consent*

#### Simplify meeting signup

*Brad Nelson*

Discussion: Could we simplify the meeting signup process? We were concerned about folks just dropping in to the video call, Brad keeps a list of attendees to add to an agenda. We could have a form that people fill out to get the meeting URL.

Brad will do this.

#### Create CG sub-groups

* Following up from last CG meeting with feedback from the W3C
* [Details](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/issues/191#issuecomment-376171112)
* Which sub-groups should we start with, and how should they function?

*AI*: discuss a the next in-person meeting.

#### HTML serialization of WebAssembly.Module objects

*Daniel Ehrenberg*

* https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/711
* Where should this be in the process?

Proposal to share across agent clusters. Maybe we want to do origin check instead of agent cluster check? We can’t serialize agent cluster to IndexDB.

* Mark Miller: what’s the rationale for not wanting to send compiled code between origins? In JS it’s sending a string.
* Dan: similar to CSP.
* Luke: what’s the google-side constraint?
* Brad: we’ve got folks trying to litigate whether we should postMessage at all. I’m having trouble with CSP analogy.
* Dan: more about how do we restrict code sharing across origins in JS? Even in WebAssembly we’d look at the response path.
* Brad: so one origin could compile, and pass the result to another origin.
* Mark: I don’t buy this. In JS the source text isn’t equivalent to module. It’s closer to function object. CSP prevents turning string to executable. If the function is passed…
* JF: I think we need that discussion with webappsec people. We haven’t agreed on threat model, and especially whether we distrust the import object. Because we do capabilities, you can’t do anything with a module without imports letting you do this.
* Dan: we should present 2 options to webappsec people.
* Mark: agreed, agents clusters don’t make sense.
* Lars: we want to also consider dynamic reoptimization, and timing attacks if we share compiled code.
* Brad: a browser could distrust shared origin code and recompile instead. Weird thing is module is both source and code.
* Ben: original idea was that agent cluster represented a process.
* Dan: IndexDB already has to cross boundaries though.
* Mark: IndexDB only has to do with origin boundary.
* Dan: right, if you close the browser, or open a new window.
* Mark: the module object is totally immutable as seen from JS?
* Luke / JF: yes.
* Mark: ignoring side-channel, sharing versus copying means it’s the same thing as strings. Not observable, not semantic difference.
* JF: timing observable though, if we recompile.
* Brad: for SAB we have things we guarantee about sharing versus copying.
* Brad: security team might force us to recompile.
* JF: can the spec even legislate this? Or can it just be a note?
* Brad: double-keyed iframe origins might even defeat this. Say a framework distributes its runtime.
* Dan: hadn’t realized that there were implementation reasons to care about agent clusters. Could reword to include agent cluster, but not for IndexDB.
* Mark: the agent is an event loop. Agent cluster is multiple event loops sharing memory, or processes with re-mapped memory say for SAB. Agent cluster is cross-cutting.
* Luke: can agent clusters span origins?
* Brad: I thought it was same origin as well.
* Malcom: “may be same origin” with iframes.
* Mark: ECMA doesn’t speak of origins in this context.
* Dan: “could be same origin” in the HTML spec.
* Dan: do we want wasm memory to be transferable?
* Luke: shareable, but not necessarily transferable.
* Ben: it goes in the transfer list only if detached.
* Luke: so transfering is straight out. With shared bit we can share. Might help remove a copy. But otherwise never.

*AI*: Dan to come back with update next meeting.

#### Process for assigning opcode numbers

*Ben Smith*

* We have some top-level opcodes left, and prefixes -- how to choose between?
* Topic came up w/ bulk-memory-operations instructions
* See [here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/bulk-memory-operations/issues/9#issuecomment-376300850)
* Current polling results:

  * [Use opcode prefix for scarcely used opcodes](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#non-trapping-float-to-int)
  * [Use LEB128 after prefix](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#webassembly-threads-proposal)
  * [Reserve 0xff prefix, count backward from 0xfe](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/2017/CG-05.md#webassembly-threads-proposal)

0xFE threads, 0xFD SIMD, 0xFC math. What do we do for the rest?

* Ben: 0xFC could be “misc” instead of “math”.
* Andreas: we talked about compartmentalization. Some implementations could leave out certain opcodes. Could make the spec easier.
* JF: I wouldn’t really worry about that, I think the spec should call out compartments.

*POLL*: use 0xFC as “misc” bucket instead of just“math”.

*Unanimous consent*

#### Consider alternate video service?

* Unicko offers WebRTC based conferencing that apparently scales to 100:

  * https://demo.unicko.com/
  * https://www.unicko.com/pricing

* Discussion: Should we prefer a WebRTC based solution? Should we try out this service?

People agree that solutions that are web standards are great. We could try out at in-person meeting as a dry-run.

*AI*: Brad to try it out.

