![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the December 11 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: December 11, 5pm-6pm UTC (December 11, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email Ben Smith to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
      1. [Follow-up on utf-8 handling in JS spec](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/issues/915) (Sven Sauleau)
    1. [The Future of ChakraCore](https://github.com/Microsoft/ChakraCore/issues/5865) (Limin Zhu)
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

#### Opening of the meeting

#### Introduction of attendees

* Andreas Rossberg
* Arun Purushan
* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Conrad Watt
* Deepti Gandluri
* Francis McCabe
* Heejin Ahn
* Jacob Gravelle
* Jay Phelps
* Keith Miller
* Kevin Smith
* Limin Zhu
* Luke Wagner
* Nick Fitzgerald
* Pat Hickey
* Peter Jensen
* Richard Winterton
* Sergey Rubanov
* Sven Sauleau
* Tyler McMullen
* Ulrik Sorber
* Yury Delendik

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

### Adoption of the agenda

Limin zhu seconds

### Proposals and discussions

#### Review of action items from prior meeting.

#### [Follow-up on utf-8 handling in JS spec](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/issues/915) (Sven Sauleau)

SS: two issues. We switched to webidl spec, [inaudible]

The JS API uses the whatwg decoder, which doesn’t behave exactly the same as the wasm decoder. Andreas Rossberg made a PR to fix the surrogate issues. Now I think those two replacement characters are the same. We still have to think about the JS API. It seems that we have something that is compatible.

#### [The Future of ChakraCore](https://github.com/Microsoft/ChakraCore/issues/5865) (Limin Zhu)

LZ: I think you’ve seen the news that Edge plans to use Chromium, but Edge also plans to use v8. So want to talk about what will happen with ChakraCore.

LZ: ChakraCore is not discontinued, still have a ton of users for non-browser use cases. We’ll still continue to work on that. Michael Holman is working on that. Linked to the general messaging on GH.

AR: What are the resources that Microsoft will put on ChakraCore, keeping up with proposals and work?

LZ: We’re still trying to figure out what will happen there. We don’t have a clear answer yet, it depends on how everything goes. Adjustment will come after these discussions. We intend to keep up with proposals.

LZ: One more thing: what does this mean to wasm? For some of our stages, we require implementation to move forward. The understanding of TC39 does not count new Edge as new implementation, but ChakraCore will count. I recommend we do the same thing for wasm.

SS: Looking at the phase doc, it doesn’t look we require implementations.

[others]: I think we do require this for stage 4.

AR: Maybe we should strike the word “web” here and replace with “production”.

[discussion about whether we require “web” engines or other engines for phase advancement]

AI[BS] make a GH issue about rewording phase advancement.

TL: I wonder about the number 2 (engines), is that because we want a significant fraction? If so, maybe we want to change that number.

AR: I think two is OK, it should be more than 1. But it doesn’t need to be the whole world.

BT: We still probably want a web engine, we don’t want two smaller engines to decide this.

BS: Yes, we’ll want to flesh out the wording carefully here.

AR: Are you going to start implementing proposals for v8?

LZ: Maybe, our plan is to contribute back to v8. But we’re not sure what the right first steps are. We want to work more closely with v8 to make sure how to do this best.

BT: We’ve been having discussions about this already, will follow up later.

### Closure
