![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the December 19th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: December 19th, 5pm-6pm UTC (December 19th, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
    2. Benchmarking subgroup - 10 mins (Ben L. Titzer, Petr Penzin, Saul Cabrera)
    3. Updates on JS Types Reflection - 20 mins (Ilya Rezvov)
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Proposals and discussions
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the December 19th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: December 19th, 5pm-6pm UTC (December 19th, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
    2. Benchmarking subgroup - 10 mins (Ben L. Titzer, Petr Penzin, Saul Cabrera)
    3. Updates on JS Types Reflection - 20 mins (Ilya Rezvov)
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Proposals and discussions
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Attendees
 - Francis McCabe
 - Deepti Gandluri
 - Robin Freyler
 - Doehyun Baek
 - Paolo Severini
 - Michael Ficarra
 - Derek Schuff
 - Zalim Bashorov
 - Mingqiu Sun
 - Sam Clegg
 - Ben Titzer
 - Yury Delendik
 - Daniel Lehmann
 - Saul Cabrera
 - Andrew Brown
 - Oscar Spencer
 - Bailey Hayes
 - Aura Munoz
 - Adam Klein
 - Ryan Hunt
 - Ilya Rezvov
 - Yuri Iozelli
 - Manos Koukoutos
 - Dan Phillips
 - Sean Jensen-Grey
 - Kevin Moore
 - Emanuel Ziegler
 - Chris Woods
 - Heejin Ahn
 - Alon Zakai
 - Ashley Nelson

### Proposals and discussions

#### Benchmarking subgroup - 10 mins (Ben L. Titzer, Petr Penzin, Saul Cabrera)

BT: we’d talked about putting together a benchmarking subgroup, to work on that. It seems to require chairs, a charter/mission statement, and a vote.
There is a repo which is mostly empty, and different efforts, some ongoing, but we want to get everyone together and collaborate and share results.
People have been shy about creating an official benchmark suite, because of the history in JS where we had benchmarks that aren’t representative of real world and competition over those wasn’t good.

BT: We have discussed this in a large email thread offline, a few things came up that can be in the mission statement, providing a benchmarking space for collaboration - we should also share best practices for benchmarking Wasm, in particular what not to do and how to measure and how not to measure

BT: also tools. So developing and sharing tools for benchmarking wasm. There is (sightglass) for measuring lots of things e.g. wasm execution time. Also sharing knowledge about existing projects, I’ve got a few and heard of some others, so we want to be able to make that public facing.

BT: We can’t control how people are going to benchmark, we will give them recommendations, and tools - we want to provide people recommendations. We didn’t write an actual proposed mission statement, probably needed to do a vote. But we’d like to talk about it today, and if we get it down, maybe do the vote.

SC: Don’t have anything to add, I have a draft of the charter. We can post it after the meeting, a TL;DR of what you just said

RH: is there a plan for meetings: frequency, format, etc?

BT: plan was to alternate with SIMD meetings, so every other week in the same time slot.

DG: the recommendations you’re making: different ecosystems have different requirements. How broad would the set of  recommendations be?

BT: i’m thinking it has to be vague and high level, for example we’ve talked about microbenchmarking which has its place but the recommendation would be not to rely too much on that. Also about how you measure startup time, instantiation time. There are ways that don’t quite capture what you're trying to measure, so we’d have recommendations about that. Also a recommendation to have a diverse set of benchmarks. We’ve also had experience with different suites, and we know some characteristics and some limitations so we can help with that too.

DG: Will there be any plans to collaborate/integrate with existing benchmarking frameworks? Jetstream etc. will  

BT: we’ll probably go through a phase where we rotate amongst people to present work that they’ve done, will make sense to invite folks who have designed JS suites e.g. jetstream, to get their opinions and experience, before we get into specific recommendations about what wasm benchmarks to use and how to use them. So we’ll have that discovery phase.

AK: was there a charter that’s visible to read? 

RH: Good practice to have it written down, so we know what we’re voting on

DS: All the stuff we’ve talked about makes high level sense, we don’t have text we agree on, you can post a PR on github so we can iterate on the language, and we can come back to a consensus vote

BT: which repo?

DG: We've’ done this previously on the meetings repo because we create a separate directory for each subgroup for meeting notes and such. Also the meetings and the charter creation can be orthogonal, we can start organizing meetings and such in parallel with nailing down the charter.

#### Updates on JS Types Reflection - 20 mins (Ilya Rezvov)

IR: Presenting [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1wtF83QvOKrUIWQ0WiQuf3IzTjd9xQmwmoKKdvsky-Zc/edit#slide=id.p)

Previously: a couple of issues blocked stage 4, I hope I’ve eliminated them now, and also found one new issue. Each of these has an issue filed on github, and a PR that implements the solution. I’m planning to merge those if I don’t get any more feedback here or on the issues.

RH: you’re saying you’ll throw this exception when you call type containing ref type. Is that for any ref type or, just for new types in the GC proposal? Or what exactly are we supporting and not supporting?

IR: Right now as implemented, it has any function references if it doesn’t contain GC types in it, just subtype to funcref, anything that contains a GC type throws an unsupported type exception. 
It’s reasonable because you can always get a type from wasm, and then create a function that has that in its signature and it will work.

RH: If I had a webassembly.function that has an anyref param with a type in it, would that throw an exception? 

IR: yes it will throw. Any heap type other than function will throw “unsupported type”

RH: there’s also externref, we don’t throw for that

IR: We don’t throw that exception

RH: I think we can allow anyref, which is the top type

IR: we don’t convert struct type to anyref automatically. You mean we allow anyref in type signature and return it as is?

RH: Only when the value type is exactly anyref, you would not throw an exception, if it’s any other value type we don’t upcast.

IR: that makes sense too, I don’t know how useful it would be. But we can change it to support that. I’ll do that

RH: There’s also, with typed function references, you could have a non-nullable funcref, which is ref that is non-nullable-  would you throw an exception for that? 

IR: initially how I intended to solve that was right now we have simple string text representation for all supported types, but for ref types I wanted to introduce a more complex structure, with Object with the kind and a nullability flag. so map the nullable argument explicitly.

RH: It’ll be nice to try and represent we can. But throw on tricky cases - anything we can faithfully represent we should so that we don’t have big gaps to fill later. 

IR: I can modify the PR to reflect that too. 

<IR presenting Bonus track slide>

RH: was just reading more on the value typ handling, from reading the GC proposal’s JS API. if you're constructing a global and trying to pass a value type, it looks like it only supports externref and funcref, not anyref. Is this a gap in the GC proposal that wasn’t updated?

IR: Good point, I forgot to update the spec for globals

RH: i’m thinking of the GC proposal. There’s a 2 value type operation that takes a string and takes ths value type, I only see externref and funcref, you can’t create a global with anyref type. Curious if anyone from the GC group remembers that.

IR: As far as I remember, the JS representation for the GC types was limited, and we’re limited on what we can pass

RH for spider monkey we implemented it is that if you wanted to create a global of anyref or structref, we accepted those, but it looks like the JS API specifies that. Is there anyone from V8 here who knows what they do for that?

AK: I don’t see anything obvious in the repo or know off the top of my head.

RH: will follow up offline.

IR: Will follow up with a Phase 4 vote next time.

DS: Next scheduled meeting is Jan 2, but there will probably stlll be people out, and we don’t have any agenda items yet.  Please get them in by Thursday Dec 28 (9AM PST, 18:00 CET) or we’ll cancel it.

### Closure
