![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the July meeting of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Host**: Google, Kirkland, WA
- **Dates**: Tuesday-Thursday July 18-20, 2017
- **Times**:
    - Tuesday - 9:00am to 5:00pm
    - Wednesday - 9:00am to 5:00pm **all-day GC / managed data discussion**
    - Thursday - 9:00am to 5:00pm
- **Location**: 6THB, 787 6th St S, Kirkland, WA 98033
    - Room: Banana Seat
- **Wifi**: GoogleGuest (no password)
- **Dinner**: TBD

- **Contact**:
    - Name: Brad Nelson
    - Phone: +1 650-214-2933
    - Email: bradnelson@google.com

### Registration

Now closed.
[Registration form](https://goo.gl/forms/R4CKTBKSnhW5QF852)

## Logistics

* Where to park
  - Free parking is available outside the building.

* How to access the building
  - The morning of event we'll meet you at the door.
  - At other times, please call or email the host.

* Technical presentation requirements (adapters, google hangouts/other accounts required, etc.)
  - Presentations will be done with a Google Hangout.
  - Contact host if you need alternatives.

### Hotels

[The Heathman Hotel](https://www.heathmankirkland.com/)

[Nearby Hotels](https://www.google.com/maps/search/Hotels+near+google+kirkland/@47.6682914,-122.1933552,14z)

## Agenda items

* Tuesday - July 18
    1. Opening, welcome and roll call
        1. Opening of the meeting
        1. Introduction of attendees
        1. Host facilities, local logistics
    1. Find volunteers for note taking
    1. Adoption of the agenda
    1. Proposals and discussions
        1. Update on proposals from May: Non-trapping float-to-int conversions (Dan Gohman)
        1. Update on proposals from May: threads (Ben Smith)
        1. Update on proposals from May: SIMD (James Zern + Brad Nelson)
            1. Presentation on WebP portable SIMD performance.
            1. Discussion on ramifications of performance results.
        1. [WebAssembly Specification](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/) (Andreas Rossberg)
            1. Status update & brief overview
                * What's there and how it's structured
                * Potential meta issues (Markdown scalability, MathJax performance, Latex familiarity)
            1. Discussion & feedback
            1. Discussion of further steps:
                * Hosting
                * Tagging for W3C
                * JavaScript & Web API specs (find additional volunteers?)
        1. [Multiple return values and generalised block types](https://github.com/WebAssembly/multi-value/) (Andreas Rossberg)
            1. Strawman proposal
            1. Discussion: Should we unify/generalise the handling of function types?
            1. Discussion: Should the proposal already include a `pick` instruction or alternative?
        1. [Tail calls](https://github.com/WebAssembly/tail-call/) (Andreas Rossberg)
            1. Strawman proposal
            1. Discussion: Interaction with host functions
            1. Discussion: What instruction scheme should we pick?
            1. Discussion: Priority, timeline?
    1. Adjourn
* Wednesday - July 19
    1. Find volunteers for note taking
    1. Proposals and discussions
        1. [GC / managed data support](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/) (Andreas Rossberg) **discussed all-day Wednesday**
            1. Discuss motivation and general design space
               * goals & non-goals
               * pros, cons, & issues of implementing user-land GC with WebAssembly as is
               * pros, cons, & issues of adding hooks to support user-land GC
               * pros, cons, & issues of making GC built-in
               * should we provide one solution, the other, multiple ones?
            1. Interaction with threads, especially on the web
               * Is it possible / worthwile to restrict cross-language references to simplify GC problem?
            1. Dive into more specifics as time allows
    1. Adjourn
* Thursday - July 20
    1. Find volunteers for note taking
    1. Proposals and discussions
        1. Future meeting dates
        1. User engagement
           * Discussion: Should we create a user mailing list or forum?
        1. Administration of GitHub
           * Discussion: How should admin access be handled?
        1. Meeting format and dates for Working Group
           * Discussion: How much should be remote?
           * Discussion: How frequently should we meet?
    1. Closure

### Schedule constraints

* Andreas Rossberg will depart mid-day Thursday.
* Lars Hansen will depart mid-day Thursday.
* James Zern is only present Tuesday + Wednesday.

## Dates and locations of future meetings

| Dates                    | Location          | Host       |
|--------------------------|-------------------|------------|
| 2017-11-06 to 2017-11-07 | Burlingame, CA    | TPAC       |

## Proposal details


## Meeting notes

Notes added here after the meeting.
