## Agenda for the January 8 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: January 8, 5pm-6pm UTC (January 8, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email Ben Smith to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

* Adam Klein
* Andreas Rossberg
* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Conrad Watt
* Deepti Gandluri
* Lars Hansen
* Limin Zhu
* Luke Wagner
* Nick Fitzgerald
* Peter Jensen
* Richard Winterton
* Sergey Rubanov
* Yury Delendik

BS: No agenda today. Any comments?

SR: (chat) Is it still possible to attend the WG meetings as a CG member?

BS: Yes, please contact me and I'll add you to the calendar invitation.

BS: Just a FYI, Dan Ehrenberg mentioned that Igalia would like to host the next
in-person meeting in Barcelona. Nothing finalized yet, so if you have any
concerns please contact me.

RW: What's the status of host bindings?

LW: Is it in terms of WebIDL types... Adam K is checking on things and will
respond to me.

AK: Yeah, still need to look into some stuff. I'll get back to you on that.

LW: In the meantime, landing reference type stuff. A prereq for this.

BT: We're also working on ref types, hoping to be done this month.
