![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the October 29th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: October 29th, 4pm-5pm UTC (October 29th, 9am-10am Pacific Daylight Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting
    1. Feature detection proposal discussion
        1. MVP compatibility (https://github.com/WebAssembly/feature-detection/issues/5)
        1. Poll to rename from "feature detection" to "conditional compilation"
    1. Trapping semantics of bulk memory operations (https://github.com/WebAssembly/bulk-memory-operations/issues/111)
        1. Recap of previous discussion
        1. Poll to change trapping to occur before writing if any bytes accessed would be OOBs
    1. Updates about next in-person meeting
        1. Tentative dates mid-week of Feb 10th, hosted by Google in the Bay Area. 

1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

#### Opening of the meeting

#### Introduction of attendees
Andreas Rossberg

Francis McCabe

Conrad Watt

Arun Purusan

Alex Crichton

Lars Hansen

Deepti Gandluri

Adam Klein

Heejin Ahn

Thomas Lively

Michael Starzinger

Zhi An Ng

Ryan Hunt

Flaki

Ben Titzer

Alon Zakai

Jacob Gravelle

Ingvar

Luke Imhoff

Ms2Ger

Nick Fitzgerald

Peter Jensen

Petr Penzin

Rich Winterton

Shravan Narayan

TatWai Chong

Derek Schuff

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

### Adoption of the agenda

Lars seconds

### Proposals and discussions

#### Feature detection proposal discussion
<TL Proposes renaming feature detection to conditional compilation>
    
TL: The new mechanism enabled by this proposal is conditional compilation, not restricted to feature detection, and the condition could be features. 

BT: Do you have other options? A more general option that doesn’t imply code generation?

TL: Agree compilation maybe not the best term, open to options

AR<in chat>: Conditional sections?

TL: As written today, that’s a great name for the proposal, good transition to my next changes

TL: Short offline discussion to bikeshed the name, but are there issues with renaming?

<No objections>

TL: Goal is to promote cross engine compatibility, it’s currently not compatible with MVP engines, the way the design currently works is that it introduces conditional sections .. <describes current proposal>. In order to have MVP compatibility this needs to work with conditional segments, the process of parsing a binary becomes not parse some sections and concatenate, with MVP compatibility this becomes more complex, the other downside is that it introduces semantically significant changes. We don’t have custom sections that change the semantics that change the … How important is supporting MVP engines? In the long term/medium term, is it important to support MVP modules, without having to worry about MVP compatibility? 

TL: Interested in hearing feedback

TL: Personally feel, most engines eventually will support new features

BT: If it’s just a matter of adding new sections, then that may not be bad, the choice is not binary, if we fundamentally change how sections work then it’s further away on the spectrum

TL: Doesn’t fundamentally change about what it means to be a Wasm module

LW: There is a gradual following of standardization of features, it’s good to go the simpler route

TL: Is Keith on the call? Discussion on the proposal

<Keith is not on the call>

TL: Anybody else have comments, and concerns? 

CW: MVP engines may already be left behind, that’s already an implicit assumption

TL: On the tools side we haven’t decided when to make the switch, I also have the sense that’s the implicit assumption

TL: Nobody strongly disagreed, will continue along the current path with more discussion on the issue tracker

#### Trapping semantics of bulk memory operations 

<Ryan Hunt presenting [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ceBIAXBMgIeNhPrURpnEMozkutqd1iUpyPVoE_5mAzk/edit#slide=id.g646d412e2f_0_0)>

RH: Are there any general concerns? 

CW: so the problem with just system memmove, the current spec tries to pre-empt this problem but fails to accomplish the goal, so I’d be strongly in favor of going back to the bound-checked version as suggested

TL: Sounds good

CW: To be clear, this will still have a slight difference from the MVP, with this reversion the segments will be bounds checked one by one, and not when everything is completed

LW: that part of the change sounds reasonable

RH: Agree with that

TL: is the behavior of a 0-byte access one-past-the-end remain valid?

RH: 0-byte access is always valid, this doesn’t necessarily change that, and there are no pkans to change that

DG: any other concerns?
Doesn’t sound like it. Ryah, do you have what you want form the community?

RH: should we do a poll?

DG: yes, do you have specific wording in mind that you want to propose?

RH: what’s on the slide: 

revert the behavior of memory.copy/fill to trap if any access would be out of bounds, before doing the writes.

LH: this also includes the change to memory.init, right? It changes in the same way to mirror memory.copy?

RH: Yes..

LH: Memory.init was changed the same way as memory.copy

RH: yes, that’s the intention

DG: so this poll includes memory.copy, memory.init

AR points out that this applies to table operations too.

RH so yes all of the operations

TL: there are init, fill and move, for each of table and memory.

DG: so this poll applies to all of the operations, to trap if any access would be out of bounds, before doing the write.

| SF | F | N | A | SA |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| 12 | 11 | 0 | 0 | 0 |

DG: Ryan, anything else?

RH: no, thanks.

#### Updates about next in-person meeting

Next in-person meeting will be hosted by Google in the Bay Area. we’re looking at the week of Feb 10, don’t have exact dates yet since we are in early stages of planning.

Other topics?

### Closure

