![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the January 16 video call of WebAssembly's Working Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: January 16, 2019 at 4pm-5pm UTC *( January 16, 2019 8am-9am PT )*
- **Location**: *on calendar invite to registered attendees*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

If you are a Working Group member no registration is required.

If you are a Community Group member who would like to observe, please register
here:
https://goo.gl/forms/HD2kLCM0iSKk7AVl1

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (chair to volunteer).
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
1. Future meetings
    1. Confirm next meeting date + time.
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

None.

### Schedule constraints

None.

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

#### Opening of the meeting

#### Introduction of attendees

* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Gus Caplan
* Ludovic Henry
* Luke Wagner
* Sergey Rubanov

### Find volunteers for note taking (chair to volunteer).

### Adoption of the agenda

### Proposals and discussions

### Future meetings

- Status of CR

BS: Not much work done here because of holidays. Plan to work on it this month.
We need to go over the issues in the spec repo and resolve, probably mostly
formatting issues.

- Connecting your GH and W3C accounts.

BS: I sent an email to regular spec repo contributors to connect their w3c
accounts with their github accounts, so we can add a bot for checking whether
contributors are community group members. Most folks have done so now, so I
believe Dominique will set up the bot soon.

LW: Status of the text format changes?

BS: There was a lot of discussion about how we should rename everything, but
that died down. Since then, we've pushed the new names to the spec repo,
binaryen, wabt, and LLVM. Possibly other tools as well. The general change has
been to remove `/` from the names, as well as to group some instructions
together (e.g. `local.get` and `local.set`).

#### Confirm next meeting date + time.

### Closure
