![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the May 25th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: May 25th, 4pm-5pm UTC (May 25th, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. Follow-up discussion from the [CG-04-27 presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PSC3Q5oFsJEaYyV5lNJvVgh-SNxhySWUqZ6puyojMi8) and [design/#1415](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1415) (20 min)
       1. Poll: Does the proposed direction sound good?
       1. Poll: Should we proceed with the [next steps](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PSC3Q5oFsJEaYyV5lNJvVgh-SNxhySWUqZ6puyojMi8/edit#slide=id.gcd82cd8251_3_6)?
    1. Present and discuss [Wasm Signatures](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1413) (Asra Ali, Frank Denis, Piotr Sikora, Luke Wagner)[40 mins]
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

###  Introduction of attendees

Alon Zakai

Dan Gohman

Frank Denis

Luke Wagner

Derek Schuff

David Piepgrass

Lars Hansen

Deepti Gandluri

Ross Tate

Dan Gohman

Francis McCabe

Mingqiu Sun

Connor Hicks

jlbirch

Conrad Watt

Paolo Severini

Alex Crichton

Andrew Brown

Emanuel Ziegler

Jay Phelps

Yury Delendik

Thomas Lively

Nick "fitzgen" Fitzgerald (he,him)

Jacob Abraham

Thomas Tränkler

Adam Klein

Rick Battagline

Asumu Takikawa

Manos Koukoutos

Daniel Wirtz

Lin Clark

Piotr Sikora

Zalim Bashorov

Chris Fallin

Andreas Rossberg

Asra Ali

Jakob Kummerow

Luke Imhoff (@kronicdeth) (they/them)

Ryan Hunt

Sergey Rubanov

Daniel Miller

Nabeel Al-Shamma

Keith Miller

Richard Winterton

Zhi An Ng

Daniel Ehrenberg

Sam Clegg

Ioanna Dimitriou

Ben Titzer

Slava Kuzmich

Sabine


### Find volunteers for note taking

Acting chair to volunteer

### Proposals and discussions

#### Follow-up discussion from the [CG-04-27 presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PSC3Q5oFsJEaYyV5lNJvVgh-SNxhySWUqZ6puyojMi8) and [design/#1415](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1415) (20 min)

<LW presenting high level summary>

**POLL: Does the proposed direction sound good?**
    
|SF|F|N|A|SA|
|--|-|-|-|--|
|13|18|7|0|0|


LI: Are we going to transfer issues to move current issues into new repos?

LW: Discussions are already in IT/Module linking proposals, are you talking about individual repos?

LI: you can move individual issues with all of their comments, but you can’t fork

LW: in that case there are probably a few adapter-function-specific issues in the interface-types repo that we could move.

SC: all the repositories will get merged in as they become staged. Will any of them be optional? Or will all of them be part of the core component model?

LW: Should IT be optional? Do they only want module linking, they’re self contained we can make them optional - we will see if particular hosts want to do that

FM: why are you separating module linking from component model, and why module linking on top of component model

LW: It’s more like the component model is the current spec, it is for high level discussion of goals etc. The other repos would get merged into it, the way proposals are moved into the spec. So the module liunking is just a feature proposal so it goes into the archive mode.

TL: Is it correct that the module linking is the first feature, before it gets merged there is no technical content at all?

LW: precisely, only high level docs, looks like the design repo until the module linking thing gets merged in

ZB <chat>: Are there any rules or recommendations (to read?) about what should be part of core wasm? What should/could be part of the new component-model in the future?

LW: there is a high bar on things that goes into the core, somewhat universal, fundamental, such that it applies to a wide scenario. Part of the goal to have a layered spec is to allow us to focus on the things i described earlier, not every possible use of Wasm will want those way, that’s an opinionated way to design modules. When something feels universal, like i32.load, pretty fundamental, then they go into core proposal. If you can’t meet that, then it makes sense to look at existing layered proposal or start a new one.

CW: We will be privileging a particular linking model

LW: in slides i have a spectrum of linking with 5 different features, all of them make sense for different use cases, but reasons to only have a subset of them. One way to relieve that tension is a layered spec with limited scopes.

RT: Core wasm about a composition of instructions, and this is for linking systems and both of them can evolve in separate directions

LW: If you look at our partners in the networking space, there are a lot of requirements and we see this evolving over the next few years

DW: this does not include string encoding, in the proposed steps, there is this link to a draft PR that essentially proposes UTF-8 and lock it in, how strongly connected is that PR to the next steps.

LW: We can iterate on the PR, it’s a draft of what the canonical API would look like

CW: it would be appropriate to have a vote on what would be in the canonical ABI (i.e. later, not in this meeting)

LW: yea

RT: The poll right now is to have a canonical ABI, and not what the ABI is

LW: yes

DW: in this case, i’ve outlined a few concerns in a recent presentation in the design repository, one concern i identified is that if we choose to have a canonical ABI, we most likely have 1 string encoding that is attached to the canonical ABI, and if we do one encoding, which is UTF-8, there are certain issues, if we use another string encoding, like WTF-16, then other languages will be unhappy. I would recommend checking out my presentations, I have concerns there that I would like to be addressed. Picking a canonical ABI will result in us having to make a choice on a single encoding. There is still a lot of time to check this out.


LW: There is a tension, in general any sys call API etc, there are always some things that get fixed, it’s a natural progression

DW: WTF-16 as the canonical, necessary superset of utf-8 and represent JS encoding, and C#. NO need to trap the ABI, cannot represent isolated surrogates.

FM: This discussion should be probably be had offline

RT: the meta point is that it will be useful to be cognizant of canonicalization can cause partition, and there are multiple ways to address that. That opinion should be heard, i also share the opinion that we should find a solution to that. We are not going to solve that this minute.

DG: make a quick note that we have a slot in a meeting 4 weeks from now to discuss this general idea in DW’s presentation, we can continue this discussion. Moving forward to the poll doesn’t mean we won’t have this discussion in the future.

AZ: question about process, the slide mentions MVP, doesn’t say anything about phases, this doesn’t move anything in terms of phases, Interface Types stays at Phase 1?

LW: That’s right

AZ: MVP in the sense that it is the current idea we are thinking, open to change as we move through the phases?

LW: yup, definitely

**POLL: Should we proceed with proposed next steps?**

|SF|F|N|A|SA|
|--|-|-|-|--|
|10|20|8|2|0|

DG: R would you like to say why you are A

R: I have been talking to DW a lot about this, I’m not sure a canonical ABI is the best idea, I can be convinced otherwise, but I’m feeling uneasy about it, based on conversations we have had.

DG: is there anything you can say about how you can be convinced otherwise?

R: want to see more discussion on the topic

DP<chat>: UTF-8 and UTF-16 are isomorphic; both can hold isolated (invalid) surrogates. Obviously any choice will favor some languages over others, but I don't see that anything is to be gained by not making a (canonical) choice.

DE<chat>: imo wtf-16 is a reasonable canonical representation

CW<chat>: I think there’s some more nuance, depending on how isolated surrogates are dealt with at the boundary
Especially when compiling legacy code that may have WTF-16 binary strings
^ to David’s comment

DP: oic,, WTF-16 is what I meant even though I'm just hearing about it today
Or rather, WTF-8

#### Present and discuss [Wasm Signatures](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1413) (Asra Ali, Frank Denis, Piotr Sikora, Luke Wagner)[40 mins]

AA Presenting [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18eKvlIjq8YImBMR2IKe8UlM33q2ppdHxWUsftZNkyzU/edit?usp=sharing)

AA: This is my first time presenting, Piotr and Frank will jump in as well.

AA: Some context: there’ been some history on signatures in wasm modules, including work by Frank Denis and others. We wanted to give a <pre-proposal?> vote: we’ve been having biweekly meetings and other discussions [linked].

<motivation slide>
AA: questions/comments?

FM: what’s an OCI image?

AA :In some cases people are distributing wasm modules - packaging them as an image format so that you can upload them in certain registry - you would have to extract the wasm bytes from the image

FD: OCI is basically like docker.

AA: Some specifications for docker images are already being made, but don’t know of any efforts to standardize them

FM: if you’re putting the signature inside the module itself, what exactly are you signing? (since you can’t sign the signature)

AA: This comes into the implementation details, the signature may appear as a custom section, and be signing a previous section - an additional section against the runtime code - parse and verify previous sections.

<in chat, regarding previous question>
CH: Commonly used for Docker registries

TL: OCI is “open container initiative”

DM: Would nested signatures be allowed in this pattern? Multiple signers in sequence on a module?

PS: Yes (in most of the designs) - will be discussed in later slides

FD: @Daniel: yes (and we have enough time left, I can demo this).

CH: <chat> Love all of this, I have some use-cases to contribute later, too :)

<AA continues presentation at Use Cases slide>

NA<chat>: When streaming wasm, what is tradeoff to put signature at beginning of file vs end?

FD<chat>: With the signature at the beginning, the module can be immediately rejected if it doesn’t verify for any public key; no need to download the rest of the module.

FD<chat>: With option (d), downloading the header is enough to check if the rest of the module will verify. (Design slides)

FM: This seems pretty complicated design, and it is also not obvious to me why this is specific to wasm, I assume that there are document structures that one could have and then if you want the wasm out of it, you strip the metadata out of it, why does it have to be a part of the wasm structure, and not a layer on top of wasm?

AA: for example if I only wanted to sign an additional section, i have to be aware that it’s a sectionalized file

FM: One could have the concept of a signed blob of bits, and have delimiters inside the blob, this would have to be a separate layer, and not embedded into the structure

AA: one advantage over having be in a separate structure is that any runtime able to parse a custom section could get that signature. Otherwise a runtime might not be able to easily verify the signature.

FM: I don’t follow that argument, don’t want to derail the discussion

AA: We can go into that a little bit more, figure out what is needed

RT<chat>: apologies if I missed this, but could a design be to have a "signature" section list the numbers of the sections it is signing - those numbers could reference sections before or after the given signature section

FD<chat>: This is option (e) which is on the next slide.

CH<chat> ++ runtimes with built-in verification sounds like the right call

AA: I only have signatures..

CH<chat>:++ runtimes with built-in verification sounds like the right call

DE: Web Bundles may be another future standard to give a file format which can contain signatures, but the presented proposal has a nice fallback property where it just works if the signature is ignored.

AA: <links> The proxy-wasm link is an example of a prototype that verifies the module on load

NA:  I'm only moderately familiar with this space. I think it would help to have the use cases say more about whether the scenarios… they are written more like “this is the existing state” of a bunch of different use cases. As a developer i mostly want to validate that the wasm the browser is loading is the one i generated. So I’m not clear on how the designs fit into that.

AA: The use case that you mentioned is the obvious use case, the authenticity of the module, the use cases that we have are more niche, why we need multiple signatures, or why we need different signatures for signatures for different parts, that’s why we’d like to have specification, or common ground for it

FM: i’m curious how this will interoperate with module-linking and component-model?

AA: Luke has been talking to us about it - a runtime could be aware if the two modules have the same level of trust, or if they are signed with the same key - or on the converse, no, I should not accept an unsigned module to link, in developing this specification we want to keep this use case in mind, we are not aware of anyone using signatures when linking modules, but seems appropriate

sbc<chat> FWIW both ELF and MachO have specific container-aware signing systems

DM<chat> In my mind the next steps this flows to is a module declaring a link to a module defined by a url and a signature, like how some JS is done right now.

FD<chat>: Or a URL and public keys

AA: not sure how to run the poll?

DG: as this is a pre-proposal, we could just do a consensus poll.

TL: should we go for phase 1, since this seems to clear the bar for phase 1 by a large margin?

DG: depends on whether the presenters are ready

AA: i think our intention is to go to a proposal. We’d love to have feedback as more people become aware.

DG: we could see if there are concerns in this meeting. We didn’t have the poll on the agenda ahead of time.

Are there concerns about a proposal?

FM: I’m not yet convinced this needs to be a design in wasm itself.

JK: I'd agree with Francis, especially from the runtime perspective, it would be very hard for us to implement in e.g. V8. It would probably make more sense like HTTPS on the web where it’s done at a higher layer 

AA: Those concerns were echoed before, the module signatures are complimentary to that, in this case we want more granularity, which could be done externally as well. Redistribution  without resigning would be possible if you were transferring across different boundaries, independent of distribution mechanisms

BT: the nice thing about wasm modules is that the format is has headers with section+length, so it’s easy for engines to ignore sections they don’t understand.

RT: it sounds like you’re proposing a “standardized” custom section. 

RT: You are assuming a standardized custom section, and for implementations that don’t want it they can skip it

AA: The intention is that all of these design options are custom sections

FM example of a scenario that would be difficult, would be an application which is a combination of JS and wasm and I want to sign it as a whole. The mechanisms would work for the wasm part but not the JS part. It’s a common scenario, if you want to sign the wasm you’d probably also want to sign the JS.

DE: Web Bundles may be another future standard to give a file format which can contain signatures, but the presented proposal has a nice fallback property where it just works if the signature is ignored.

SC: FWIW both ELF and MachO have specific container-aware signing systems

FD<chat>All the options we have just use custom sections, to leverage existing parsers.

DE<chat> he Web Platform has some mechanisms for verification like SRI, where signature-based SRI is under consideration. If this is intended to ship on the web, we should consider the relationship/interaction between them.

DG we are running out of time, are there some github issues where we can continue this?

AA: ill post a link to the design repo and the wasm issue, we’ll post it there.

https://github.com/wasm-signatures/design

https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1413

### Closure
