![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the March 16th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: March 16th, 4pm-5pm UTC (March 16th, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. [Relaxed SIMD](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1401) and poll for phase 1 (Zhi An Ng) [10 min]
    1. [Propose to initiate phase 1 of stack switching proposal](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1teI1N282B7Dog314G22Emmaur2XCVtqYwwq5c_AK-BE/edit?usp=sharing) (Francis McCabe) [15 minutes]
    1. [Branch Hinting](https://github.com/WebAssembly/branch-hinting) - Poll for Phase 2 (Yuri Iozzelli) [5 min]
    1. Discussion on irreducible control flow ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1KE7z7ry3VEug3nyIvnLwTtxxPhkp73CrYjpATpnNSF8/edit?usp=sharing)) (see [[1]](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/796) and [[2]](https://github.com/WebAssembly/funclets/blob/master/proposals/funclets/Overview.md)) (Conrad Watt) [30 min]
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

### Opening of the meeting

###  Introduction of attendees

Luke Imhoff

Mike Voronov

Chris Fallin

Derek Schuff

Francis McCabe

Arun Purushan

Paolo Severini

Zalim Bashorov

Daniel Hillerström

Jay Phelps

Jakob Kummerow

Nabeel Al-Shamma

Slava Kuzmich

Paulo Matos

Zhi An Ng

Thomas Lively

Yury Delendik

Yuri Iozzelli

Dan Gohman

Ben Titzer

Sergey Rubanov

Lars Hansen

Alex Crichton

Rick Battagline

Andrew Brown

Pat

Conrad Watt

Mingqiu Sun

Ryan Hunt

Dan

Paul Dworzanski

Alon Zakai

Manos Koukoutos

Asumu Takikawa

Sam Lindley

Ioanna Dimitriou

Nicholas

Emanuel Ziegler

Paolo Matos

Shravan Narayan

Pretnar, Matija

Flaki

Rich Winterton

Ross Tate

Gen Ashley

Sean Jensen-Grey

Adam Klein

Heejin Ahn

Sam Clegg

jlbirch

Sean Jensen-Grey

Jacob Mischka

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

### Proposals and discussions

#### [Relaxed SIMD](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1401) and poll for phase 1 (Zhi An Ng)

<ZN Presenting [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1Qnx0nbNTRYhMONLuKyygEduCXNOv3xtWODfXfYokx1Y/edit?usp=sharing)>

CW: For the question of you want to have instructions that are underspecified, do you need more granularity than one instance, or one bundle of consistent execution. ‘Fpenc’ seems much more granular

ZN: Should this be a goal of the proposal? On the web I don’t see it being particularly effective. In other environments, I see this being useful so we can pass this around. I don’t know, needs more discussion about what the scope of the proposal will be

<From chat>

DanG: Will this mean there will be unsafe/fast/relaxed variants of existing instructions?

BT What do you mean by unsafe?

DanG: gcc -ffast-math unsafe on one side. On another, allowing more implementation specific behavior that pushes quirks up to the end user

ZN: We have a couple of instructions in mind, we won’t have unsafe versions for everything, will be tackling one at a time. If you have a tool chain using the  -ffast-math flag, it’s basically adding support for new instructions, i.e. combining with fast math we will be able to use new instructions

FM: I thought that one of the reasons we wanted determinism was for security and anti-fingerprinting?

ZN: yes this is something we have to bring up early enough in the process (e.g. TAG) to look at the privacy and security implications. The existing SIMD has some finger printing concerns but during the review it was found that it doesn’t reveal any new bits. You can also determine some hw specification based on whether SIMD is supported.
But in general we’ll try to bring it up as early in the process as possible.

DanG: Worth mentioning the reciprocal instructions will expose more information

ZN: yes, those are among the hardest to specify

DG: we’re over time we should move forward. Should we do that poll?

**POLL: Relaxed SIMD to phase 1**

|SF|F|N|A|SA|
|--|-|-|-|--|
|11|18|7|0|0|


####  [Branch Hinting](https://github.com/WebAssembly/branch-hinting) - Poll for Phase 2 (Yuri Iozzelli) [5 min]

YI: Last time we didn’t have time for a poll and there were a couple of issues.
<presenting>

CW: do we have someone willing to implement a prototype lined up?

YI: I didn’t file the patch yet, it’s in a good shape, can have that ready in a couple weeks, don’t know about engines. Not sure how to implement in the reference interpreter, what would it do? 

CW: in terms of the process, the reference interpreter wouldn’t be a priority, but a real implementation would be much more important since the point is to see if we get performance improvements

<YI Agrees> 

NA: The 0 byte for extensibility is in the table? 

YI: yes. for every function there’s a vector of instruction hints. 

DG: we need to move on, if there are objections to the poll we should bump to the next meeting. Do we have any?
<none>
OK. so the poll is to move 

**POLL: Branch hinting proposal to phase 2**

|SF|F|N|A|SA|
|--|-|-|-|--|
|1|17|19|0|0|


#### [Propose to initiate phase 1 of stack switching proposal](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1teI1N282B7Dog314G22Emmaur2XCVtqYwwq5c_AK-BE/edit?usp=sharing) (Francis McCabe) [15 minutes]

<FM presenting>

HA: There have been multiple versions of the proposal, which one are you proposing?

FM: There will be.. I have avoided talking about that - the final proposal will not look like anything we’ve done so far. 

HA: Moving to phase 1 for candidate proposal? 

FM: at this point i want to focus on the requirements and not on the answer.

RT: at this point from phase  0 to 1 we want to recognize that it’s a problem we want to solve.

SL: At a high level there’s interest in solving the problem

DG: getting to the end of the time allotment. we’re indicating interest, and phase 1 will move forward with an overview doc, etc.
We’ll do unanimous consent, I haven’t heard any real objections or concerns

**Poll: Any objections to stack switching moving to phase 1?**

None heard and none in the chat.

[Chat]

BT: Does hardware CFI basically preclude moving executable stacks?

RT: it does not appear so yet, but it's still being investigated

BT: My recollection of the arm proposal is that it is based on signing ret addresses with stack addresses


#### Discussion on irreducible control flow (see [[1]](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/796) and [[2]](https://github.com/WebAssembly/funclets/blob/master/proposals/funclets/Overview.md)) (Conrad Watt) [30 min]

<CW presenting [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1KE7z7ry3VEug3nyIvnLwTtxxPhkp73CrYjpATpnNSF8/edit?usp=sharing)>

AZ: I can give 2 quick comments: the term stackify isn’t really accurate (nor is the history). It’s a specific algorithm used in Cheerp. The algorithm there and in LLVM all do pretty much the same thing when they have structured code.

CW: The blog post by cheerp refers to llvm stackify, might need more standard terminology

BT: Probably the one opposed to this the most - multiloop construct looks good. Engines implementing unstructured control flow seems unlikely, they might opt out of it altogether

CW: if people have things they want to explore, we can carve out more time in the next meeting.

AZ: to see performance data on this, what would this actually allow us to make faster. 2 questions, how easy it makes for producers to produce code, and how much faster vm run. Big question for me is does this make vm run faster and by how much?

CW: I don’t have data, the kind of program you would be looking for is when passed through stackify it needs a lot of indirections, It’s possible to construct a program that would do this but I don’t have any information on how many programs there are in the wild, and this I’d really like to collect more data

RT: another nuance: I’ve been talking with Luke and Francis about Interface Types, we’ve been trying to ensure that the fusion algorithm can efficiently create a CFG, but it might end up not always being semi-structured. So it might end up pushing some problems down to the engine side in that case.

CW: there might be another feature in flight that punts cfg out of semi-structured territory

FM: it’s a little early, very possible that this could end up being an issue for fused adapters

RT: something I've been wondering, you mentioned in your talk that the big blocker is the optimizing compilers. Certainly that’s the case for JS where you need heavy optimization to get good performance. Wasm itself in theory isn’t supposed to need such heavily optimizing compilers to get good performance. Do we know how much difference that makes in practice?

BT: good rule of thumb is that baseline tiers are 1.5x to 2x slower than optimizing tiers

<chat>

PM: Is there any writeup on multiloop outside this presentation?

CW: it’s scattered across individual comments on github. The idea is really more due to Andreas. I’ll be happy to writ something up

RT: it'd be useful to have more insight into why the baseline vs optimizing compiler performance differs

BT: Primarily register allocation

### Closure
