![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the March 2nd video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: March 2nd, 5pm-6pm UTC (March 2nd, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
See the calendar invite for the link.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. Follow-up discussion of [Branch Hinting](https://github.com/WebAssembly/branch-hinting) (Yuri Iozzelli) [20 min]
        1. Poll for phase 2?
    1. Specifying sub-languages (Andreas Rossberg) (15 min)
    1. Presentation and poll for removing support for duplicate imports ([module-linking/#7](https://github.com/WebAssembly/module-linking/issues/7)) ([slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uq3uFkmXHRjP5V56wKlmxMH_gveYcigc8DIXYyGpWE4)) (15min)
    
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

Derek Schuff

Luke Imhoff

Rick Battagline

Arun Purushan

Yuri Iozzelli

Zalim Bashorov

Ryan Hunt

Sam Clegg

Francis McCabe

Lars Hansen

Petr Penzin

Asumu Takikawa

Paolo Severini

Nick "fitzgen" Fitzgerald (he,him)

Ben Titzer

Alex Crichton

Ross Tate

Eric Prud’Hommeaux

Adam Klein

Yury Delendik

Luke Wagner

Jakob Kummerow

Andreas Rossberg

David Piepgrass

Manos Koukoutos

Emanuel Ziegler

Rich Winterton

Sean Jensen-Grey

Zhi An Ng

Nabeel Al-Shamma

Thomas lively

Conrad Watt

Deepti Gandluri

Johnnie Birch

Keith Miller

Flaki

Petr Penzin


### Follow-up discussion of Branch Hinting (Yuri Iozzelli) [20 min]

[slides](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1fzgBZQmLaiH9Qp7tFS8oO13MBzLmU3El/view?usp=sharing)

RW: If you were to provide a capability like PGO, would that eliminate the need for branch hints? 

YI: PGO is not exclusive, branch hinting can be used in conjunction with this. Developers aren’t good at estimating branch hinting, you can use wasm to collect pgo info and feed it back to LLVM, you can use PGO for better hints, not mutually exclusive

RW: why would you need a hint, if you know from PGO that this is usually taken

YI: who is the subject, compiler or the engine?

RW: The compiler would put it in, something there that compile will provide enough information to the engine and then the engine would do something with that information

YI: this is exactly what we’re doing here, the compiler alone cannot do this, but it can add extra information to the engine

KM: Most PGO systems[...] Usually PGO systems talk about I would consider this branch likely or unlikely

RW: that’s what i’m trying to figure out, whats different from the general PGO, llvm will provide the relevant information and clang will generate

KM: llvm starts throwing a lot of the data, it will be gone. Main thing you have at the end is the branch hint

DS: I really see this as a form of PGO, in particular, some of this optimization can't be done by the compiler - LLVM in particular uses this for block placements and this is something we can’t do in Wasm right now, I can see this as something we can integrate with LLVM’s PGO

YI: tried to fiddle with LLVM to try adding support in the compiler. The exact same is used for PGO and manual hints. Manual hints has some default probability values.

RW: There isn’t a way to do LTO, correct?


<in chat>
BT: Branch hinting should be thought of as the wasm binary format by which a PGO system communicates its inferences to a wasm engine.
So this is orthogonal to how we get the hints.

<in chat>
KM: Agreed

<in chat>
RT: +1

DS: LTO happens at toolchain as well, we do that already, we link into a big binary. Emscripten does cross LTO between JS and Wasm, that is pretty much happening now.

RW: You couldn’t do another LTO type thing, that’ll happen in the runtime when generating code. 

DS: I don’t think I understand what you’re suggesting. What BT suggested in chat is right - you would use this as a part of the PGO system

RW: it’s only useful if you have some feedback with that

DS: This is just one component, you would need some way to feed the profiling info, that can be done with instrumentation, that doesn’t need to be standardized.

RW: on board with that, i would agree with that, if we don’t have the PGO, developers won’t be able to take advantage of that

YI: That’s also why it’s difficult to find a benchmark, with PGO you can also start to see something but it’s more work to get it all work

RW: on board

KM: question about benchmarks, can try doing in JSC, can disable engine’s likely and unlikely for native VM code for JS and see how that impacts benchmarks. That will tell you if branch hinting has any value in generated code for some kind of language runtime, it will likely be multiple % points.

YI: Right now in V8, Wasm branch hinting is used for something - for division, experimental branhc on null. On the codebase, we try to add something on null checks, even if there is a lot of overhead, you can already see that it’s making a difference because V8 is using ints for branches for null checks but not everywhere else.

KM: you would see 5-10% benchmark regression, very significant.

DS: should we subsume this functionality to allow tools to do block layout? I.e. proposal like funclets, any thoughts on that beyond what is in chat?

<In chat>
WV: it wouldn't, but at least it would be able to express the structure of an unlikely block being outside a loop naturally, and a VM would not have any reason to undo that

<chat>
BT: PL security checks (e.g. array bounds checks) are unlikely to fail, so an offline compiler may use branch hints without PGO, too.

<chat>
LI: Branch hinting is used for memory allocators a lot too, so those being ported into WASM from Rust, etc could use those hints.

CW: I made a soft promise to talk to CG about unstructured control flow. Expectation was that some optimizing VM cannot generate code for it very well.

PP: toolchain can do layout rather than just create a hint table. Can’t estimate if it will be better.

DS: funclets seems high risk based on discussions we've had before. Good chance there is a lot of resistance, won’t pan out. Should we advance two proposals if they overlap? Okay with that, especially no strong push on funclets. Especially for going from phase 1 to 2.

BT: My understanding of funclets is that it’s trying to do irreducible control flow, it’s to increase the expressiveness of the control flow in wasm - orthogonal to this - we don’t have block layout, it might be useful to extend branch hinting to have stuff for block layouts, my understanding of V8 is that this would be hard to do

DS: we're getting over time for this. Curious to get a sense whether people want to hold this back from phase 2 specifically.

CW: understanding for seeking phase 2 is out of the hope that engines will more likely implement a prototype for benchmarking. It’s the wrong way round.

LH: I have made some comments that format is too limiting, and it should be extending the format so it can support more PGO functionalities

DS: what we heard last week is that you had started one for v8, and Jakob would be supportive of helping that go in.

YI: I already have a prototype for V8, it’s a POC but trying to refine it, I think it’s reasonable that with a little work this could be added to V8.. in a good shape now. 

DS: i’ll be happy to have my team help further down the line when thinking about integration with LLVM. given that environment and one outstanding concern about whether we should broaden the format. Will you be okay with implementation and phase 2 waiting until we nail down the format more.

YI: Yeah, sure. My main concern is that we get to some point that we don’t decide to do this with instructions at some point - I can work on implementing this in a codebase, add to Cheerp compiler etc. If the CG agrees that the custom section is the way to go, Phase 2 then is just a number.

DS: LH’s concern is not with using custom sections

YI: We talked about it in the issues, I wanted to address those things in the spec, didn’t want to change it under the hood. 

DS: We are so far over time - most folks are happy with the direction. Continue working on it - I would be confident going forward in the custom section with the knowledge that we will need to tweak the content. 

YI: Good for me

<chat>
SJG: +1 on that comment
The comment I was agreeing to is the idea of not forcing engines to implement a PoC for benchmarking purposes.
 
 <chat>
CW: to be precise, moving to phase 2 in itself does not make engines more likely to implement PoCs, so the real thing we want isn't a phase vote, it's a commitment by _someone_ to do a PoC for benchmarking purposes

<chat>
BT: Well, some teams might have OKRs such as “implement all phase 2 proposals for Wasm”
 
 




### Specifying sub-languages (Andreas Rossberg) (15 min)

[slides](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/main/2021/presentations/2021-03-02-rossberg-sublanguages.pdf)

EP <chat>: is there a way to quantify how much/what fragmentation is inevitable? (gc seems like a compelling example)

AR: Right now, none of these features are in the standard, but some are close - but there are cases where this will already be needed - example - threads introduces non-determinism so block chains can’t use it

DS: there are blockchains already implementing some subset of Wasm like without floating point non-determinism

AR: for FP, you can work around, can make it deterministic if you pay for the performance. With SIMD there is discussion for non-det SIMD. Threads is one useful example, GC also. In some examples you don’t want a GC, like in embedded space. SIMD itself another set, environments which have no benefits from SIMD, Apart from those, no particular ones.

LH: Wouldn’t this change the way we spec things? First of all, bulk memory and reference types depend on each other, Let is independently useful, not sure which proposal it’s in - the proposals may not be the right level of granularity, or we would have to break them down into independently useful components

AR: not implying that proposals are the right granularity, right level of discussing it. Within proposals you can make certain parts optional or not, or you can group multiple proposals into one. Not proposing something concrete here. The risk is that we make it too granular, it has to be decided on a case by case basis.

FM: what about the other half of this, known as feature detection, want to be able to run varying payloads depending on what’s available.

TL: I was just going to mention feature detection, it’s going to be relatively high priority going forward given SIMD status, these can be complementary to that - we definitely need both parts

AR: maybe they could be talking about the same feature, feature detection i would probably think about it at smaller granularity.

DS: When we are defining the subsets, we want to minimize the number of subsets. Feature detection has the problem of if we put a module right now, which browser supports what etc. 

TL: the forces making you desire few large granular features work the same for the spec and feature detection.

AR: It might be true, I still think that for example when you do threads, that future threads instructions, for this kind of things that wouldn’t require a new definition

LW: The fullness of time, vs. eventuality or what we should be doing now..

RT: if you take determinism as an example, that is a positive property you are trying to overlay to Wasm, only applies to certain subset. A way to formalize that is as a separate proposal to say what is determinism in Wasm, a subset of Wasm. A resource constraint Wasm, what are the positive properties you guarantee.



AR: That might be a more suitable way of slicing this, that might make it separable from feature detection

BT: Java was originally for embedded systems, it had this things called profiles, embedded, j2se, j2ee, only a handful of them. They define JVM feature sets, class libraries feature sets, you can write Java to the profile, limited number of profiles.

AR: I wasn’t aware of that, but that sounds like something that makes sense - profiles sound like a good idea

FM: profile is a great idea, goes beyond this too. What about deprecations, can we use something like this to deprecate something.

AR: Interesting, I had thought of that - you could use/abuse it for that

FM: we should plan for obsolescence.

AR: I don’t see any principal problem with this

DS: coming up on time, a lot of interest in this, we should keep talking about this. This won’t be a typical phased proposal, but there's a the diversity of different considerations, I wonder if it makes sense to fork a repo anyway and have multiple bugs inside to discuss this.

AR: Yeah, why not - we may not be able to follow the phased proposal 

DS: sounds like we met phase 1 requirements that we think this is a problem and we should think about solving.

AR: Fair point

DS: any objections?

TL: sounds great, needs more discussion. Important to come to a shared understanding to come up with what this is for.

EP: before forking or before merging it back in?

TL: Before merging it back in

RT: should we have some phase 0 discussion?

EP: That could be a good place to capture this discussion, profiles vs. modules

AR: rephrase this more specifically as profiles, to make it closer to what I’m at getting at. Can create a repo and see how that lines up with feature detection, and how we can widen the scope

BT: profiles might be the end outcome, profile supports certain feature sets, to get there we need to define feature sets and where the boundaries lie.

AR: <Agrees>


SJG<chat>: Semantic weight to parts of proposals, what is the base and what is implemented on the base.

EP<chat>: is there a possibility that WASM engines themselves could be modularized along these partitions ? i.e. link in feature set X

SJG<chat>: extensions, feature testing, versioning

BT<chat>: It gets complicated the more feature sets you have and when they have dependencies

SJG<chat>: Is the goal, "how do we structure the evolution of wasm so that it doesn't crush under its own weight"
x86, arm, c++ have all approached some maximum complexity
How does RISC-V approach this? Rust?

ZN<chat>: riscv has base + extensions https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RISC-V#ISA_base_and_extensions

EP<chat>: another somewhat inevitable parameter is the published version of WASM some impl followed

SC<chat>: J2ME gives me nightmares :)


### Presentation and poll for removing support for duplicate imports (module-linking/#7) (slides) [Luke Wagner]

LW [presenting](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1uq3uFkmXHRjP5V56wKlmxMH_gveYcigc8DIXYyGpWE4)

BT: allow anything to be exportable. In the future we might allow import with the type argument, will the duplication take the type argument as well? You might import and give it some other type argument.

LW: I was imagining that it would be simple string equality, you would be importing something in the generic sense

BT: in the jawa use case, you can parameterize module by a type, that’s space prohibitive to do that, you need to import individual things.

LW: Maybe they could be type parametrized? 

BT: since we don’t have params right now, something to think about in the future

CW: Are the exports themselves parametrized, or are they exports of a parameterized module?

AR: a bit out of scope for what LW was talking about. To me is just about removing duplicates, parameters would benefit from that, or orthogonal more or less.

RT: Could someone go into details about how duplicate imports were allowed to begin with?

LW: it took extra work to specify to reject them. They were allowed by asm.js, you can import and use multiple times, log use case, weak reason.

AR: no strong reason to disallow them. We are thinking of use case like that. Overloading case we use at dfinity for a while. If you have a polymorphic host function, this is a way to emulate. You can import same thing with different types, and instantiate with different types, this only works for host function, and not for Wasm modules. In our case it was clearly host API so it didn’t matter. Consider this for versioning, you can import the same function with additional arguments, in the future version you won’t need a new name.

BT: What bad thing happens if we keep allowing this? 

LW: if we try to reframe 2 level imports as single level, then we will have this problem that duplicate imports can’t be reflected as that. We have to allow duplicate exports, in certain cases, or special case in another way. Some weirdness has to arise in some other space.

AR: You have to allow multiple exports.. You will have to map multiple exports to different imports..

CW: some kind of aliasing thing, this space of index space comes from another thing i import before hand

AR: you can no longer supply different values for the multiple imports. Since you are only supplying one instance. This desugaring doesn’t work, you have to make it a special case somehow. Or desugar in 2 separate instance imports.

BT: The duplicate exports is the only place an engine has to inspect import/export strings - because it’s based on strings and positional, that’s why the problem shows up


DS: there’s generally some support for this, it seems a little bit fast to go for a poll today to remove a feature from the web. We should try to get more eyeballs on this; e.g. I wasn’t following the module linking proposal, so I first saw it on agenda here. Maybe we should file a design issue on a more visible avenue. Maybe we don’t need a full on phased proposal, but should have more discussion.

LW: That sounds reasonable, will file a design issue, and follow up again with a meeting

RT: useful to get feel of the room?

KM: curious how single level imports interact with ESM modules proposal. ESM needs two level modules.

LW: default exports

<in chat> BT: It seems like adding a restriction to workaround a previous restriction (duplicate exports)

KM: if it doesn’t have a default then error?

TL: I wouldn’t object, do feel that don’t quite understand the actual motivation - would welcome a design issue. 

DS: Next week’s schedule - our current meeting time is based on US pacific time which changes next week, so please note that time changes for the next meeting by an hour depending on where you are located. 

