![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/WASI.png)

## Agenda: February 06 WASI video call

- **Where**: zoom.us (see Registration below)
- **When**: February 06 2025, 17:00-18:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Yosh Wuyts and Bailey Hayes
  - Email: wasm@yosh.is and bailey@cosmonic.com

### Registration

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

If this is your first time attending, please [fill out the registration form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpO6Lp2L_dZ2_oiDgzjKx7pb7s2YYHjeSIyfHWZZGSKoZKWQ/viewform?usp=sf_link) to receive an invite. Please make sure you have joined the CG as above, and that your name appears on the [membership page](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/participants), before registering.


## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. WASI WIT artifacts should include `unstable` features WebAssembly/WASI#640 - 15min (@ricochet)
    2. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_

## Notes

### Attendees

- Bailey Hayes
- Andrew Brown
- Jeff Charles  
- Mendy Berger
- Stephen Berard
- Rahul Chaphalkar
- Luke Wagner
- Chris Woods
- Colin Murphy 
- Kevin Moore
- Mike Warres
- Michael Sanchez
- Sehyo Chang
- Timmy Silesmo
- Yosh Wuyts
- Sam Clegg
- Piotr Sikora
- Marcin Kolny
- Dan Gohman
- Pat Hickey
- Johnnie Birch
- Thomas Trenner
- Hung-Ying Tai

Meeting lead: Bailey Hayes
Notes: Yosh Wuyts

### WASI WIT artifacts should include unstable features WebAssembly/WASI#640

**Bailey**: [https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/issues/640](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/issues/640)

**Bailey**: We’d additionally like to share an update on this morning’s release for WASI 0.2.4

**Bailey**: When we release an OCI package it doesn’t necessarily include all of the unstable features in that package. We want to propose to the group to include these features so there is a single source of truth.

**Bailey**: 0.2.4 was released earlier today, now automated and includes signed packages. When we pull a package and extract its WITs, we would like it to include the unstable features.

**Bailey**: opinions?

[no objections]

Bailey: great, we will include these in the releases going forward

## Postmortem 0.2.4

**Bailey**: 0.2.4 was released today and took about 5hrs to release. A lot of that
time was spent on automation though, which is really cool! [demo]

**Bailey**: There were some downsides though.

**Yosh**: In order to automate releases, we are using github actions. In order to automate we have to give it permissions. The way that we have been doing our releases for WASI, it’s a little different. We release packages to the organization. So we “wasi/io” that lives on the organization scope. The default token `GITHUB_TOKEN` does not give access to publish packages to the org. The only way we can do that is use a personal token with org tokens of Bailey’s to publish to the organization.
  
**Yosh**: We could hope GitHub will make this possible between now in the next release or we can change how we’re publishing. This seems to be the flow that GitHub is most happy with and the flow they encourage. 

**Pat**: Do we have a good idea of where all of these users are right now?

**Bailey**: Is anyone here pulling this without wkg?

**Mossaka**: We as runwasi devs are fetching OCI artifacts from Containerd. We do use wkg to build / distribute Wasm components as OCI artifacts

**Yosh**: I will follow-up with you Joe. 

**Pat**: Seems like this is one of those things, we tried to automate, learn some things and need to adapt. Let’s file an issue and figure out how to change. 

**Yosh**: We should file an issue.

**Yosh**: We believe wkg may be able to replace/deprecate the use of wit-deps. If we could finalize that transition by the next release, that would be a good thing to do. 

**Yosh**: Another thing that we may want to stop doing or consider at some point, we run individual releases of the sub-packages. At the end, we gather these up and make one final bundle. It is unclear if anyone is actually using that right now. Before we had OCI releases, it served as a snapshot. Now that we have a mechanism for snapshots, it seems less clear what the value of this repo. In terms of releasing, it’s this last thing where we go and copy all of the files over. Does anyone here rely on this repo. 

**Bailey**: That would create a single wit, is that ok?

**Pat**: I’ve found that this is a primary entry point. Getting people to use a tool to fetch from OCI, they will bounce out. I don’t think we’re at the point with OCI automation where anyone is using it exclusively. I think it’s still worthwhile to have a text copy in that place. Expecting them to fan out into the different repos is a big ask.

**Yosh**: Good feedback.

**Bailey**: We do need to automate this in the WASI repo. Got everything up to that point today. That’s good feedback. Thank you.

**Yosh**: We are trailblazing for automation, consuming WIT, etc. We rolled with sed to do that today. It would be better to use something like wasm-tools to do semantic versioning aware bumping.

**Pat**: Allowing wasm-tools to ingest a wit file and spit back out an updated version. 

**Pat**: oovm has been working on a formatting tool. We should also have the formatting tool. I did not understand what automation they wrote to do that. I would gently discourage anyone from bike-shedding too much.

**Yosh**: That is a good point for tooling for wit documents. 

**Bailey**: We found today that we’re inconsistent in the CM repo and examples with a mix of 2 and 4 spaces. Luke are you ok with 4 spaces as the owner of WIT.md in the CM repo? We’re seeing between oovm’s proposal and Eric from Bytecode Alliance’s SIG Docs preference for 4 spaces. The reasoning is that we don’t have much nesting and 4 spaces enables better readability. 

**Pat**: Let’s go with 4 then.

**Mendy**: +1 for 4 spaces.

**Pat**: There’s clearly some kind of pretty printer for this. If the canonical way to do that is to round-trip to the binary that’s fine.

## Other Announcements

Bailey: announcements?

**Chris Woods**: announcement! - Embedded SIG (E-SIG) has proposals for how to adopt the component model, as well as preserve and we would like to start socializing some of our ideas. Expect to start seeing some issues come by. It’s still early days, but we’re keen on start getting feedback.

**Chris Woods**: If anyone wants to have in-depth discussions, reach out! The next e-SIG meeting is on the meeting calendar, but if you want to get an invite please feel free to reach out!

[meeting over]
