![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/assets/WASI.png)

## Agenda: November 13 WASI video call

- **Location**: *link on W3C [calendar](https://www.w3.org/groups/cg/webassembly/calendar/)*
- **When**: November 13 2025, 17:00-18:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Yosh Wuyts and Bailey Hayes
  - Email: wasm@yosh.is and bailey@cosmonic.com

### Registration

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. WASI OTel: A standard for using OpenTelemetry in WebAssembly, phase 1 vote (@asteurer and @calebschoepp)
    2. [WASI Monorepo and release changes](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/issues/672) (@ricochet, 15 min)
    3. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_

## Notes
### Attendees

- Bailey Hayes 
- Andrew Steurer
- Kate Goldenring
- Caleb Schoepp
- Aleksandr Steurer
- Jeff Charles
- Roman Volosatovs
- Daniel Mantei
- Michiel Van Kenhove
- Sehyo Chang
- Alex Leccese
- Till Schneidereit
- Alex Crichton
- Rahul Chaphalkar
- Yosh Wuyts
- Joel Dice
- Dan gohman
- Luke Wagner
- Darrin Pelletier
- Johnny Birch
- Ryan Day

### WASI OTel: A standard for using OpenTelemetry in WebAssembly

**Bailey Hayes (in chat)** Phase process https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Contributing.md#1-feature-proposal-wasi-subgroup

**Bailey (in chat)**: OTeL is currently phase 0: https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/blob/main/Proposals.md#phase-0---pre-proposal-cg

**Caleb**: Open source observability framework

<slides>

Bailey: holding a consensus vote, let’s wait 10 seconds to hear if there are any objections

<time passed>

Bailey: Congratulations: the vote passed!

## WASI Monorepo and release changes

Bailey: we’ve been running the release process for the past two years. We’d like to move to a monorepo to make things easier to run releases. Lots of solutions in the issue raised, and see a path forward to taking those proposals and integrating them.

Bailey: would love to hear feedback now if anyone has any.

<time passes>

Bailey: generally heard from folks to do what works best. We’ll move forward with this and integrate the feedback so we are all set for the next release.

## Other

**Yosh**: Typically I give an update the first week of WASI subgroup. We are no longer expecting to have a release in December. We will not have a vote in two weeks and then shipping in December. The reason for that is 1) JCO testing. Not all test programs are passing and it is more work that will fit in two weeks. 2) The other part is changes to the component model. Our timeline was on built on the assumption that we will not find component model design changes, but during implementation we have found one. This means we are not on the schedule that we thought we would be. 


