![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/WASI.png)

## Agenda: July 24 WASI video call

- **Where**: zoom.us (see Registration below)
- **When**: July 24 2025, 17:00-18:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Yosh Wuyts and Bailey Hayes
  - Email: wasm@yosh.is and bailey@cosmonic.com

### Registration

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

If this is your first time attending, please [fill out the registration form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpO6Lp2L_dZ2_oiDgzjKx7pb7s2YYHjeSIyfHWZZGSKoZKWQ/viewform?usp=sf_link) to receive an invite. Please make sure you have joined the CG as above, and that your name appears on the [membership page](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/participants), before registering.


## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. Yosh Wuyts: WASI 0.3 July Update. [Slides](./presentations/2025-07-24%20WASI%200.3%20Update%20July.pdf)
    1. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. _Submit a PR to add your announcement here_

## Notes

### Attendees

- Bailey Hayes
- Yosh Wuyts
- Colin Murphy
- Andrew Brown
- Alex Crichton
- Jeff Charles
- Dan Gohman
- Luke Wagner
- Pat Hickey
- Paul Osborne
- Johnnie Birch
- Chris Woods

### WASI 0.3 July Update

**Yosh**: It’s been about a month since the last update. These are still estimates despite the fact that we’re getting closer with increasing confidence. The estimates we are making are more informed as we progress. Some time in November everything will be done and approved for Rust bindings. JavaScript will take a little longer. 

Implementation Milestones, we are in July now. The next one is the Wasmtime host bindings. We’re still aiming for August 2025. The next is JCO host bindings for October 2025. The prototyping repo is no longer being worked on, everything in there has been moved over. Last time we discussed a series of 4 PR’s and all of those have now landed. On Monday there was one PR out, with a last public API facing change. We found a large slow down and has now been fixed. It’s the last bit of polish for the external API service. A release should be going out this week, it might not include everything, with more in August release. 

The bulk of the work going forward will be on WASI. The Component Model async side is largely completely moving on to the feature work being focused on WASI. The expectation for that is still end of next month. We have a high degree of confidence in the underlying bits. 

The first of these PR’s has been filed. This is wasi:sockets and selected because it was already well tested. We are not sure if the next wasmtime release will have all of the WASI bits in it, if it doesn’t, then hopefully the main branch can be pulled. But if not the September release should. The wasmtime serve and wasmtime run commands require the wasi 0.3 proposals being implemented so don’t expect those to work just yet. Still on track.

JCO is the next implementation milestone. Victor and I caught up earlier this week. The component model has been fully implemented. It is not stable yet. It is not fully tested or done. The approach that Victor is taking right now, starting with simpler components from the prototyping repo, and ensuring those pass. Then increasing in complexity. Once all of those tests pass, it should be a conforming implementation. For the WASI SG vote, we need to still update the WIT definitions. HTTP has some questions, for example. That is ongoing. Dave Bakker has been putting in a number of good pr’s for getter/setter and are in the process of being landed. We are getting ready to automate the releases of the rc versions of 0.3. This way we don’t need to do what we did for p2 where we used the wasmtime version of the definitions into JCO, but instead use the OCI release candidates.

That’s the update in a nutshell. Things are on track and heading towards the estimates that we set.

**Colin**: When we’re talking about sockets, I just got three people in the last 24 hours have asked me about ureq and reqwest. I support WASI in a publicly available rust sdk. They see this wasi only code, and they want it to go away. Obviously reqwest will use futures. How fast of a follow will be able to upstream in these or rust crates.

**Yosh**: You’re talking the rust crate, ureq right?

**Colin**: Yes. For example, I’m assuming Roman would upstream. I’m guessing there’s a loop for adding the sockets making sure you don’t get much of a slow down.

**Yosh**: In 0.2 for the rust ecosystem, there were several steps of stability. Are things possible at all? We can get the wasi crate out and build with cargo component and validate that all works. In order to migrate existing libraries, what you need to be able to do is have a compile time switch. If “target = wasm32” and “wasip2”, we will need to also do this for 0.3. Potentially this could be possible with an adapter library. So in this case for existing crates to move over, we need to first add this to rust. 

**Alex**: If the goal is do the same as linux, I don’t think that will be great for the Wasm world. If you’re talking about http level stuff, the question is do you use the HTTP approach or sockets? So, in that sense, P2 isn’t necessarily missing anything, it would be possible to implement all of the things for sockets. In addition to what Yosh is saying

**Colin**: Because the idea of taking code and making a service work natively then also work in WASI is challenging. There is an effort, p3 is going to be a lot easier, everything will be easier just to hold off. 

**Bailey**: Roman demonstrated a couple months ago that it is possible to take a p3 component and p3 wasi-sockets and build with a higher-level crate, sqlx. You’re right that there’s a body of work that has to happen here to build the ecosystem to take advantage of p3, but p3 has to be launched first so that the standard language libraries and toolchains can switch on p3.

**Yosh**: I’m quite interested. The rust compiler team said they would be interested in the p3 target once the specs have been voted on.

**Colin**: It’s good and can’t wait. 
