![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the May 15 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: May 15, 4pm-5pm UTC (May 15, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: JF Bastien
    - Email: jfbastien@apple.com
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email JF Bastien or Ben Smith to sign
up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. Propose creation of new repo (not a fork of spec) for debugging/debug info. Analogous to tool-conventions.
    1. Discussion: [Change Signature of Global Constructor](https://github.com/WebAssembly/mutable-global/issues/16)   
       Currenty uses `type`, but that looks redundant in `import.type.type`. Alternate names: `content`, `value`,
       `valueType`, `element`.
    1. Should Mutable Global proposal be included in WebAssembly v1?
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

Opening of the meeting
Introduction of attendees

#### Roll call

* Andreas Rossberg
* Benjamin Bouvier
* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Brad Nelson
* Dan Ehrenberg
* Dave Voyles
* Deepti Gandluri
* Derek Schuff
* Jacob Gravelle
* Jay Phelps
* JF Bastien
* John Hall
* Keith Miller
* Lars Hansen
* Limin Zhu
* Lin Clark
* Luke Wagner
* Mike Rourke
* Pat Hickey
* Peter Jensen
* Richard Winterton
* Sean Westfall
* Sergey Rubanov
* Splurp
* Sven Sauleau
* Tyler McMullen
* Ulrik Sorber
* Yulia Startsev
* Yury Delendik

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

JF seconds

### Adoption of the agenda

### Proposals and discussions

#### Review of action items from prior meeting.

Titzer: AI from the previous meeting about limits. Some progress made, hope to finish by the next meeting. Working w/ Dan E.

JF: Dan, can this be added to the spec?

Dan: Would reset the clock?

Brad: this adds a 90 day clock.

JF: Tested all the current implementations, any differences?

Titzer: Yes, only small differences, pinged the GH issue.

JF: Memory limit?

Titzer: Will follow up.

#### Propose creation of new repo (not a fork of spec) for debugging/debug info. Analogous to tool-conventions.

Derek: Started w/ source maps. New interest from devtools folks from Mozilla and Chrome. Also mono. Would like to propose not just repo but also CG subgroup. More than one output, a spec for debug info used by tools -- something like DWARF or source maps. Also some extension to browser devtools protocol or extension API. 
Propose to have two co-chairs: Derek and Yulia. 15 people there at last week’s meeting. Will write a charter for subgroup and bring it forward next meeting.

JF: how to proceed? People contact Derek for charter?

Derek: Yes, I think so.

Discussion about electing Yulia. But not voting this meeting.

Luke: Same debugger format in JS, should this be the same group or different?

Derek: I think this is outside the scope of wasm CG. Possible that one output is not attached to wasm spec, but something more general. One complaint about source maps is that it is just a google doc, some would like to make it more formal. We should discuss how to integrate in the meetings.

Derek: Will post charter in gist.

#### Discussion: Change Signature of Global Constructor

Currently uses type, but that looks redundant in import.type.type. Alternate names: content, value,valueType, element.

Lars: I prefer valueType.

Andreas: Some more context: we don’t use type in other names.

Titzer: What are you proposing Andreas?

Andreas: Not favouring anything, none of the alternatives are great.

Ben S: Maybe rename element -> elementType? We’re also renaming initial -> minimum.

Jay: what is the actual type of that property? What does it represent?

Andreas: it’s an object representing a value type. For now it’s just a string, an enumeration, but could be more in the future. A JS value that describes a value type.

Jay: would “name” make sense?

Andreas: you’re interested in what the name denotes. The fact that it’s a string isn’t important. Its denotation is.

General agreement that perhaps “value” is better.

Dan: I kinda prefer the existing API, but not in a strong way.

[Unanimous consent to move forward with “value”]

#### Should Mutable Global proposal be included in WebAssembly v1?

Ben: there are 3 implementations. Core and tests complete. Big concern about shipping earlier is the breaking change, would like to do ASAP. Returning global object from exports instead of returning a number. Mozilla has it on in early beta, only bug report was from Alon.

Brad: it’s just a 90 day clock, would be fine.

JF: it’s in implementation phase. Seems to meet criteria to move to standardization phase. We could had off to WG, and WG can decide whether to put in v1 or not.

Titzer: I don’t think it should be in v1.

Lars: no implicit conversion from WebAssembly.Global to numbers, risk increases as we wait.

Brad: If there were to move to stage 3 or 4, would we ship it even if it wasn’t in v1?

Titzer: Yes, we’ll ship it as soon as possible.

JF: Moving to phase 4 only hands it over from CG to WG.

Brad: in either case we’ll be adding delay.

Unanimous consent to move mutable globals to standardization phase (phase 4), including the rename we just discussed.

#### Closure
