![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the February 12th (Feb 13th UTC) video call of WebAssembly's Working Group

- **Host**: Google Hangouts
- **Date and Time**: February 13th, 2018 at 7am-8am UTC / *February 12th, 2018 at 11pm-12am PT*
- **Time Date Link**: [Link](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=WebAssembly+WG+Meeting&iso=20180212T23&p1=224&ah=1)
- **Location**: *Brad will email Google Hangouts link to WG members + registered CG guests prior to the meeting*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Brad Nelson
    - Email: bradnelson@google.com

### Registration

If you are a Working Group member no registration is required.

If you are a Community Group member who would like to observe, please register
here:
https://goo.gl/forms/HD2kLCM0iSKk7AVl1

## Logistics

The meeting will be a Google Hangouts call.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (chair to volunteer).
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Update from chair on First Public Working Draft.
    1. Discussion on assigning spec section reviewers.
    1. Future meetings
       1. Confirm next meeting date + time.
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

None.

### Schedule constraints

None.

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

* Alex Danilo
* Brad Nelson
* Heejin Ahn
* JF Bastien
* Conrad Watt
* Limin Zhu
* Andreas Rossberg

### Opening of the meeting

### Introduction of attendees

### Find volunteers for note taking (chair to volunteer).

Brad to take notes.

### Adoption of the agenda

JF seconds.

### Update from chair on First Public Working Draft.

Brad presents status of doc.

The Transition Request for our fPWD was accepted by the W3C, the announcement will likely go out on Thursday.

Caveats with Bikeshed version up on main repo. Something seems to have been lost vs just before commit. Brad will sort it out soon, but see this for now: http://flagxor.github.io/spec/

Discussion on changing tools. Maybe dropping Sphinx in favour of pure Latex.

Rossberg issues with typesetting:
* kerning
* wrong fonts
* type equations too small
* spacing
* links in equations

Discussion on Bikeshed and its limitations.

Brad mentions katex seems to lack the arbitrary limits (vs MathJax).

### Discussion on assigning spec section reviewers.

Discussion on labels (decided don't need a special label for editor review).
Notion of doling out chapters.

Brad will likely create issue for detailed reviewers for each chapter.

Andreas Rossberg - Reviewer for JS + Web specs
JF - Will do a cursory overview of all docs

Rossberg mentions another mechanization of the spec now in Coq.
Fixes from this mostly landed.

One outstanding PR that's not a typo.

Discussion about what happens based on severity level.

Changes can be (added to notes based on AI for after meeting):
* Editorial
  * No changes to text content
  * Corrections that do not affect conformance
* Substantive
  * Corrections that do not add new features
     * Changes conformance of agents.
  * New features

The timeline after fPWD (added to notes based on AI for after meeting):
* First Public Working Draft.
  * Starts a 150 day clock on WG members (present and future) to notify the group of "essential claims".
  * After that 150 days, only new claims based on changes to the spec can be excluded (everything else members must license).
* Future Working Drafts.
  * We have to publish a revised draft at least every 6 months. It need not have changes, but needs to explain why.
  * When we revise the spec after this point, we have to carefully capture a list of what "substantive changes" have occurred, publishing that in a revised draft. That draft has a shorter clock (60-90 days depending on when someone resigns).
  * If we advance from Working Draft to Candidate Recommendation and then need to change something, the process resets back to 0.
* Candidate Recommendation.
  * We trigger this once we think we have a version that "done", i.e. something people should implement.
* There is a process (at W3C) after this that can kick it back to us.
  * [Diagram](https://www.w3.org/2017/Process-20170301/#rec-modify)

Discussion on how to find reviewers for other chapters.
JF mentions we should have more webby folks take a look.

AI: bradnelson - find a webby reviewer.
JF suggest Alex Russell.

### Future meetings

Should do next meeting in 2 weeks.
Will keep the APAC, EMEA, US cadence.
Next do EMEA + US friendly time. 9am.

Two weeks from now.
Tentative April 10-12 meeting.
Andreas not available the week after.

Wording review at in person meeting.
Probably the 12th second half of the day.
Will coordinate with organizers.

### Confirm next meeting date + time.

### Closure
