![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the October 10 video call of WebAssembly's Working Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: October 10, 2018 at 3pm-4pm UTC *( October 10, 2018 8am-9am PT )*
- **Location**: *on calendar invite to registered attendees*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

If you are a Working Group member no registration is required.

If you are a Community Group member who would like to observe, please register
here:
https://goo.gl/forms/HD2kLCM0iSKk7AVl1

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (chair to volunteer).
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
1. Future meetings
    1. Confirm next meeting date + time.
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

None.

### Schedule constraints

None.

## Meeting Notes

### Opening, welcome and roll call

### Opening of the meeting

#### Introduction of attendees

* Andreas Rossberg
* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Limin Zhu
* Luke Wagner

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

Ben takes notes.

### Proposals and discussions

BS: We have a number of new changes to the spec repo which are preventing us from moving forward with the process. In particular, the text changes, updates to tests, and some PRs that have yet to land like [Permit work in parallel during instantiation](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/745).

BS: AFAIK the changes to test suites will prevent advancement as well.

LW: That seems strange, since many RECs don't have any implementations.

AR: If we keep adding tests will that prevent us from reaching REC?

BS: Good point, I'll follow up w/ Eric about this.

AI(BS): Find out what are requirements are for spec test conformance.

AR: It seems like the [text format changes](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/issues/884) are the most substantial changes that we'll make to the spec. Is there any plan for applying these?

BS: I think we just have to decide that we're satisfied with the new names and decide to do it all at once -- change the spec and all tools to use the new names. We already decided at the CG that we were OK with moving forward.

AR: It seems that we should do this sooner rather than later.

### Closure
