![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the March 11 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: Virtual meeting
- **When**: March 11, 16:00-17:00 UTC (9am-10am PDT, 17:00-18:00 CET)
- **Location**: *link on W3C [calendar](https://www.w3.org/groups/cg/webassembly/calendar/) or Google Calendar invitation*

### Registration

No registration is required for VC meetings. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Agenda items

1. Opening
1. Proposals and discussions
  - Announcement about next in-person CG meeting (Thomas Lively)
  - SpecTec discussion and poll ([repo](https://github.com/Wasm-DSL/spectec/tree/main/spectec)) (Andreas Rossberg, 45 min)
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

## Meeting Notes

To be filled in after the meeting.

### Attendees

- Thomas Lively
- Nick Fitzgerald
- Adam Bratschi-Kaye
- Francis McCabe
- Andrew Brown
- Paolo Severini
- Sergey Rubanov
- Wonho Shin
- Yury Delendik
- Heejin Ahn
- Derek Schuff
- Michael Ficarra
- Zalim Bashorov
- Nuno Pereira
- Erik Rose
- Sean Jensen-Grey
- Brendan Dahl
- Conrad Watt
- Luke Wagner
- Jeff Charles
- Oscar Spencer
- Colin Murphy
- Alex Crichton
- Andreas Rossberg
- Emanuel Ziegler
- Jakob Kummerow
- Deepti Gandluri
- Dan Gohman
- Chris Woods
- Manos Koukoutos
- Keith Miller
- Jae Hyun Lee
- Nick Fitzgerald
- Mattias Liedtke
- Guy Bedford
- Sukyoung Ryu
- Ilya Rezvov
- Julien Pages
- Ricky Vetter
- David Degazio
- Jake Follest
- Sam Clegg
- Chris Fallin
- Yosh Wuyts
- Ben Visness
- Chris Fallin
- Marcin Kolny

### Proposals and discussions
#### Announcement

TL: Google would like to host the next CG meeting, likely in October, in the Munich office. I will file an issue to gather scheduling constraints.

ICFP is the 12th-18th, we’ll want to avoid conflict with that. Perhaps the following week?

CW: It would be nice to leave the following week free to decompress.

#### SpecTec discussion and poll ([repo](https://github.com/Wasm-DSL/spectec/tree/main/spectec))

AR presenting [slides](presentations/2025-03-11-rossberg-spectec.pdf)

AR: You’ve mostly seen this, but what we are talking about here is mostly the left side (Latex/prose backend). 

One new backend spits out typechecked/desugared AST, a hook for external tools to access the definitions.

(Slide: Why now is a good time)

AR: No unmerged proposals writing spec text yet except maybe custom page sizes?

NF: Not writing spec text yet, but will soon.

CW: Clarification: we discussed at the in-person meeting that you will continue maintaining the existing OCaml interpreter. Is that right?

AR: Yes, I think this isn’t going to change soon, probably for years.
The meta-interpreter currently heavily relies on the reference interpreter, so we aren’t in a place to be able to get rid of it right now.

FM: If you own a proposal repo, this will cause some pain when we upstream from the main repo again.

AR: This is the point in time where that is minimized.

FM: I mean a combination of the conflicts that we’ll get and the reworking of the CI.

AR: these 3 parts I showed for the setup are already implemented in the sepctec repo. It doesn’t really affect your workflow, it just invokes spectec when you type ‘make. Of course it still changes the workflow of authoring the spec.

FM: So is the tool online or something we have to download?

AR: What we are talking about is moving the tool to the main spec repo to have everything in one repo.

BV (chat): I've just gone through the build process locally and it was equally as easy/difficult as building the current tooling.

BV: What would you plan to do with the main repo’s current 3.0 branch? Would you merge that first before upstreaming spectec?

AR: We could go either way. For me personally it would be less work to bypass the 3.0 branch since the branches are on par anyway. If I merge 3.0 first, but then immediately merge the spectec branch afterwards, there won't be much of a difference.

There are still some relevant TODOs in 3.0 and I don’t really want to merge into main until they are addressed, but if we merge spectec first we don’t have to address them.

BV: That makes sense.

(Slide: SLA)

TL: In a few years when the current generation of researchers turn over, do you think there will be continued research momentum?

AR: hard to predict, depends on how successful the current research efforts are. Of course probably not everything will pan out. But I hope that we have onboarded enough people in the community by then. I also hope and expect that at least some research will continue.

CW: I can imagine projects running longer than 5 years, at least in Singapore. The grant proposal with Philippa is 3 years.

AR: This is also why it’s a good time to transition, we have a lot of people available to help. And we can transition incrementally/gradually.

(post-MVP)

KM: It comes up somewhat often for me: is there any consideration for diffing output, e.g. you have a fork and you want to see what’s happened in the main repo, or see what has changed in a proposal.

AR: We have not thought of diffing the generated document, but diffing the spectec source was an important consideration in the design of the tool.

Diffing latex and rst is terrible, and the prose is so large, that if you have a big change, e.g. SIMD the diff gets hard/impossible to read carefully enough. The syntax design of spectec and the formalism is really small; the intention is that diffs are small and localized and you get much better diffs. But we haven’t looked into diffs for the document itself., there are existing tools for diffing pdfs etc, but I haven’t used them, not sure how well they’d scale. I could imagine building something into spectec but not sure how that would work, what the diff algorithm would be. It might not be worth the trouble.

KM: For example, TC39 proposals can often be presented as a simple diff.

AR: One thing I tried to do as the editor is to be relatively precise with the changelog in the appendix. But of course that’s just bullet points in the appendix.

KM: But that would be just at the end of the proposal phase.

CW: It might be fun to try to autogenerate the appendix.

AR: yeah it might be a n interesting project to figure out the best way to do diffs. It’s more about the backend rather than the frontend.

BW: how are extra parts of the spec handled, e.g. the appendices, embedding spec, name section etc?

AR: we have these splices that spectec would replace with definitions/formulas. There are 2 major kinds of splices. One is display math / prose. The other is inline math. One nice thing about spectec is that you don’t need to do these verbose ::math`` things. You just need ${} and spectec will typeset that for you. That’s how we did some of the prose that’s not generated. I converted the inline math wiht these inline splices, so the same would work for the appendix. Ideally we have no occurrences of the rst math hook anymore in the end.

JF (chat): Similar to that question has there been any thought to gating spec features behind proposal flags. That way you can see what a certain feature contributes to the spec specifically. I imagine gating would be hard because of the cross cutting of proposals.

AR: the short answer is no, we haven’t thought about that

CW: We should have profile support in spectec at some point

AR: Yes, that' s similar but different. One thing that proposals do is they generalize things. They are more additive whereas profiles are defined as being subtractive. Going in the opposite direction. It seems possible in principle but I don’t have a concrete idea about how you’d do it. Worth thinking about.

KM: It seems like a hard problem. A lot of proposals go through a lot of proposals and are very cross-cutting. Combining big rewrites would be hard especially since the interpreter isn’t part of spectec.

AR: yeah you would want a sort of multi-way diff where you see which parts come from which forks.

CW: we’ve been putting some finishing touches on the threads repo; we’ve been mostly focusing on the reference interpreter since we saw spectec coming. There are just a few todos in the latex there. Presumably we’d put threads in behind spectec. What would we do now to get threads into the spectec version?

AR: Threads are pretty intrusive. It would require some changes to the prose generator. It has to be made aware of threads and their contexts. I can't speak to that. There might be some minor features like new operators we need to render the prose.

CW: if we wanted to do it purely in spectec we might need some kind of co-incutive thing

AR: it could also be possible to keep the axiomatic layer manual for now, like the numerics.

CW: I’m still in favor of keeping some parts manual.

AR: There are two levels for SpecTec support. The notation and rendering we should get to sooner rather than later. But that doesn't imply that the backends are able to understand the axiomatic semantics.

TL: Let’s move to the poll.

Poll: Adopt spectec as the toolchain for authoring the wasm spec.

SF: 15
F: 17
N: 1
A: 0
SA: 0

TL: That is consensus.

### Closure
