![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/WASI.png)

## Agenda: January 13 WASI video call

- **Where**: zoom.us (see Registration below)
- **When**: January 13, 17:00-18:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Lin Clark
  - Email: lclark@fastly.com

### Registration

If this is your first time attending, please [fill out the registration form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpO6Lp2L_dZ2_oiDgzjKx7pb7s2YYHjeSIyfHWZZGSKoZKWQ/viewform?usp=sf_link) to receive an invite.

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. _Sumbit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Plan for the transition from current witx-based APIs to wit and canonical ABI (@linclark)
      - Update on async and streams work (@tschneidereit)
      - Plan for updating wasi-libc (@sunfishcode)
    1. Release snapshot2 w/ `accept()` (@npmccallum; https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/pull/458) 

### Attendees
- Lin Clark
- Dan Gohman
- Chris Suszynski
- Saúl Cabrera
- Sam Clegg
- Shiqi Wang
- Luke Wagner
- Piotr Sikora
- Arne Vogel
- Oscar Spencer
- Amanieu d’Antras
- Till Schneidereit
- Pat Hickey
- Harold H
- Ralph Squillace

### Plan for the transition from current witx-based APIs to wit and canonical ABI

**Lin Clark:** Plan for transition to WIT
WIT is ready for proposals that:
don’t require async/streams
don’t have a dependency on libc 
Proposals that require async/streams (such as HTTP) will be unblocked with Alex’s work — expected late Q1
Proposals that depend on libc will be unblocked by Dan’s work

**Till Schneidereit:** Luke presented the details for how async works, different ABIs and how streams are integrated. Since then, based on impl work from Alex… area with lots of devils in the details. We’ve come to understand finer details, have simplified the model quite a bit. In particular, Luke and Alex and Aaron Turon have been collaborating on defining the semantics in much more detail. That resulted in some changes to the ABI. Have something that we feel pretty good about. Alex is now updating the proof of implementability implementation. For async, I think we’ll have something to share at the end of the mont**Harold H:** combination of updates to the proposal and an implementation that demonstrates viability of approach. Will start streams impl after that, since it depends on async. The’eres a little bit more uncertainty in that timing. I think in late Feb, early March time frame. With that, we’ll unblock proposals that don’t depend on libc. At that point, we’ll want to make progress on moving these proposals and rapidly getting them towards stability and production quality. As soon as the documentation is updated, we would encourage other implementations to dig in. One open question is how do we experiment with proposals. We don’t need to change toolchains because we don’t need to change the std libs, so we can start experimenting with these new proposals in a really robust way.

Building on that ,we’ll get back to the libc work. We’re working on unblocking those.

**Dan Gohman:** On the libc front… wasi-fs has been updated to WIT format. Also includes other changes, like dropping the rights system and chmod feature people have been asking for. Next step forward is to port wasi-libc to this API. One of the interesting questions is that we don’t have support for streams. Right now, using a temporary measure called push/pull buffers. One thing to observe is that we haven’t had a snapshot in a long time. Could make people think it’s stable, but that’s why we used the preview terms. When this new fs  comes out, it will be incompatible. We’ll have release docs that explain the compatibility.

**Till Schneidereit:** Will also need proof of implementability, and working on that in parallel. As soon as that, in particular streams, is solid enough, we’ll shift over to implementing that in lower level of wasi-libc. Dependency chains so precise timing is hard, but hope is that it won’t be lagging too far behind. 

**Sam Clegg:** Do we know how many of these proposals are libc-dependent?

**Dan Gohman:** Probably 7 or 8

**Till Schneidereit:** In some ways, those are the much more stable proposals. In many ways, the unblocked ones are the more interesting proposals. Wasi-crypto, wasi-nn, wasi-http etc should all be viable without libc

**Chris Suszynski:** One question about HTTP. I’m wondering about sockets in general. I imagine it’s blocked by …

**Dan Gohman:** wasi-http is not blocked by sockets

**Piotr Sikora:** Do we have a plan for promises?

**Luke Wagner:** Askin gabout trailers? Future type constructor

**Till Schneidereit:** That’s the part that will be ready sooner, right?

**Luke Wagner:** Yeah, part of that same batch of work.

### Release snapshot2 w/ accept() 

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Let me give a little background. While we’re very excited about work on HTTP, streams, etc, our level of pain dealing with snapshot 1 is high so trying to bridge the gap, without getting in way of current work.

Proposing snapshot2 that includes an accept call that allows to accept new incoming connections. … polling for incoming socket events. Runtime preopens socket, Wasm module can poll lon it and can call the accept function to init new file descriptor. Does not violate cap sec because you’re operating on an existing open resource. This would significantly alleviate our pain.  

Invited Harold who’s done implementability prototype.

**Harold H:** Made a small poc that implements the accept proposal. Also implemented listener fd interface implementation, which puts an already open fd. It all works well. Also added the missing functions in Rust so that we can use Rust natively.

I think the changes to Wasmtime and Rust itself are pretty small, so tell me what you think.

https://github.com/haraldh/WASI-1/commit/21d18effac2d9e8607e23ab99c45c38b43d92ef8
https://github.com/haraldh/wasmtime/commits/sock_dirty_accept-0.32
https://github.com/haraldh/wasmtime/commit/565339672de5c4bb25a976b8fe438937e57d2c1c
https://github.com/haraldh/wasmtime/commit/6d42ef247056913bf0ca58b4b381a111c585fe81
https://github.com/haraldh/rust-1/commit/49516998cd488dc3029f95d2bb903e746a3fa528


I put the fd in the file table, so handled like a normal file. Should be sufficient for a small server. 

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Intent was to just prove it out. We would follow up with an actual implementation

**Dan Gohman:** Test integration with systemd?

**Nathaniel McCallum:** systemd will preopen fd 3 and above, would be up to the runtime to take that and expose it to wasm. Only difference in the systemd case is that the fd is preopened.

This could be a fairly simple patch to Wasmtime to learn about the preopened fd. Could be a really nice user experience to bridge until we get streams.

**Harold H:** Even a crate for it to pass the whole thing. Not much code. Just have to accept the accept

**Dan Gohman:** So this all seems aligned with what we described before. Seems like it hits a sweet spot, small enough but gets us a big win

**Luke Wagner:** Yeah, nice job finding this fix.

**Sam Clegg:** So if we made a new version of wasi-libc, would all imports be from preview 2? Haven’t made a transition like this in a long time.

**Dan Gohman:** Original plan was do snapshots regularly. Got off track with that. We’re going to abandon snapshot. Should we just modify snapshot in place?

**Till Schneidereit:** THat would actually be in keeping with what we’re planning for WIT. In that world, this would be a minor bump. That might be an argument for saying we’ll do this as an additive thing and still call this snapshot one. I’d be much more uncomfortable with that if we planned to keep snapshots alive. But since we just talked about the timeline for the transition strating in this quarter, I feel like we can get a whole lot of bang for little buck by just adding this to snapshot1.

**Sam Clegg:** Agreed, probably easier not to invent new tooling now

**Nathaniel McCallum:** So I have a question for Dan in terms of timing this update. You just talked about a new release of libc. I imagine we need to get this in before the major changes happen. 

**Dan Gohman:** Yes, I expect it’s not too much work and then we can do a release before we start transitioning to WIT.

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Should we support trad libc address of returning the IP address of the incoming connection. Inclined not to to minimize surface. Tradeoff in that it was based on practice of immediately asking for IP for logging. You were doing two syscalls back to back which had perf issues. That does mean that in layers above like Rust, we’ll have to fill in all zeros.

**Dan Gohman:** Agreed, we can bikeshed on what the IP address is, maybe loopback address. Should fill in dummy now though. 

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Biggest question isn’t address but port

**Dan Gohman:** Address would be what you’d want to log, right?

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Correct

**Piotr Sikora:** Could we use byte addresses so that it’s invalid values?

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Yep

**Chris Suszynski:** I have another idea. We could for example calculate IP and port with algo that is reproducible so that every time you open you would get same IP on module. Hashing would make it reproducible.

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Yeah, I expect the behavor of falsifying this won’t affect most people. Address and port as a key could overwrite. Point is well taken, let’s diff between what committee would need to accept as a standard and what guidance we provide to implementations. 

**Piotr Sikora:** In terms of app env, you can always have option to not disclose or provide. 

**Dan Gohman:** I think we have a pretty lcose approx shape. I think we can take this off line.

**Till Schneidereit:** Any objections to adding this to snapshot 1

**Nathaniel McCallum:** No concerns with that approach.

**Till Schneidereit:** Sam, really glad you brought this up. It would create a lot more churn if we cut a new snapshot. Seems like a really good idea to just add it.

**Lin Clark:** So it sounds like we have agreement here

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Action items, will update pull request with results of this convo and doc a recommended impl, and will then mark as a non-draft so that it can be merged. 

**Till Schneidereit:** Is pull req right venue for the ongoing discussion around IP address?

**Dan Gohman:** Maybe new issue?

**Nathaniel McCallum:** What remains to be discussed? Are we discussing what the appropriate rec to impls?

**Dan Gohman:** Maybe best way to go is for you to put draft text in the PR and then people can discuss

**Till Schneidereit:** Does the plan of record now mean that once no one objects, that PR lands and then we do a PR to wasi-libc, and then a new release is done? Is everything else from here on details and impl?

**Nathaniel McCallum:** For our part we’ll also impl in Rust std lib and wasmtime as well. 

**Till Schneidereit:** That means in terms of recs for implementers, that means working in parallel. Once it’s merged, we can encourage impls to start updating.

**Nathaniel McCallum:** Can have separate wordsmithing for things that depend on libc. Shouldn’t block merge of function
