![WASI logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WebAssembly/WASI/main/WASI.png)

## Agenda: September 8 WASI video call

- **Where**: zoom.us (see Registration below)
- **When**: September 8, 16:00-17:00 UTC
- **Contact**:
  - Name: Lin Clark
  - Email: lclark@fastly.com

### Registration

If this is your first time attending, please [fill out the registration form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdpO6Lp2L_dZ2_oiDgzjKx7pb7s2YYHjeSIyfHWZZGSKoZKWQ/viewform?usp=sf_link) to receive an invite.

The meeting is open to CG members only. You can [join the CG here](https://www.w3.org/community/webassembly/).

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Announcements
    1. _Sumbit a PR to add your announcement here_
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Poll to advance Spiderlightning to Phase 1
        1. [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vQAt5BbFRqpS5tLFx0gegpGZ4TFLuSGRIP3kc5BIV6IPtwd6PwjjTsrmND6xqZFlRTXk-lyCwYazSW6/pub)
    1. _Sumbit a PR to add your discussion item here_

### Attendees:
- Lin Clark
- George Kulakowski
- Arne Vogel
- Andrew Brown
- Brian Hardock
- Syrus Akbary
- Mossaka (Joe)
- Dan Gohman
- Joel Dice
- Kevin Hoffman
- Krisztian Gacsal
- danbugs
- Kyle B
- Luke Wagner
- Mingqiu Sun
- Nick Vidal
- Nicolas Devillard
- Chris Woods
- Onescu Alexandru-Vlad
- Piotr Sikora
- Adam Mohammed
- Yong He
- Steve Schoettler
- Victor Barros
- Valery Antopol
- Frank Schaffa
- Patrick Hickey
- Chris Suszynski
- Ayako Akasaka


## SpiderLightning poll

- mossaka
  - quick overview again
  - abstract out higher-level capabilities like “key-value store”
  - high level, and agnostic to backend providers
  - intended for distributed applications
  - allow configuration at deployment time
- Piotr Sikora
  - what does it mean to advance to phase 1?
  - previous proposals have had the feedback to split into smaller pieces
  - so is this the interfaces or sdk
- mossaka
  - in my find, it’s the interfaces for phase 1
- Lin Clark
  - would there be a challenge in advancing these as separate proposals
- Mossaka
  - one overlap is common (de)deserializing formats
  - will be a good example of a world file when wasi preview2 comes out
- Lin Clark
  - so SpiderLightning may want to advance as a profile proposal
  - we haven’t thought through how that works
- Andrew Brown
  - my understanding is that there would be some attempt to reconcile SpiderLightning with some of Piotr’s mentioned previous proposals
- Kevin Hoffman
  - if SpiderLightning as a whole constitutes a profile, does that mean using it mean you are locked into the entire suite of wit files?
  - have often seen factorings where some modules use different parts of the system
- Luke Wagner
  - I think that is a great concern
  - defining world files right now
  - which interfaces are imported and exported
  - but a component living in that world can still run in other places that provide and need those interfaces
- Kevin Hoffman
  - that does seem to line up with the need to depend on only part
- Luke Wagner
  - we should consider bringing up these decisions in a WASI meeting soon
- Syrus Akbary
  - the name of the proposal was opaque to me, it is not very self descriptive
  - you describe the proposal as being about cloud events
  - maybe a name mentioning that would help
- mossaka
  - that’s good feedback, thanks
- Kevin Hoffman
  - this may be too in the weeds, but what if there are two conflicting key-value contracts
  - how do we make sure that we have at least a lot of use of one kv store interface (say).
- Luke Wagner
  - currently everyone has to type their own anyway
  - so we can only get better by sharing
  - there’ll still be specialization
- Kevin Hoffman
  - my other question is around discoverability
  - suppose there’s related interfaces like kv, kv-simple, kv-extended
  - how do they discover the right wheel and not reinvent it
- Luke Wagner
  - distinguishing between programmatically and human interpreted strings
  - the former sure seem like they want to be urls
  - could possibly claim the a url scheme, so we can have wasi:// urls
- mossaka
  - another perspective and issue is that even if we have those related interfaces, there’s still the challenge of different kv implementations. for example, some kv stores allow scanning and others do not.
  - classic portability problem. being more implementation agnostic means missing out on less portable features
  - our design challenge is finding good places in this space. for example, do we provide scanning as an api, and teach developers that using that may reduce the portability of their applications?
- Piotr Sikora
  - if we have too many different key-value stores, then we are trading off portability, and I would wonder what is the port of standardization
- Luke Wagner
  - we can do one small set of things
  - there’s always the escape hatch of doing your own thing, which is no worse than the status quo
- Lin Clark
  - I would propose the following, and do want feedback on it
  - we put SpiderLighting in phase 0, with a note saying that individual interfaces will move through it independently
  - this lets us link all the proposals together, while allowing us to advance individual interfaces as separate repos 
  - do we want to poll on individual interfaces, or is that premature? specifically, I think anything mentioned last week is plausible to poll about this meeting
- Kevin Hoffman
  - more of a procedural question
  - this was presented as a single bundle
  - if we are going to proceed, it would be nice to have a discussion on each interface separately
- Lin Clark
  - too soon to talk about design specifically
  - this is just to decide whether this is in scope for us to discuss at all
- Steve Schoettler
  - I am also interested in evaluating each domain API separately
- Lin Clark
  - I’m suggesting separate polls for each of those domains
- Dan Gohman
  - there’s a lot of commonality between interfaces
  - events, serialization types, etc
  - there seems to be space for design iteration
- Kevin Hoffman
  - some of those seem like design-time concerns
  - I wanted to avoid this bundling to begin with
  - but these are very conceptually different things, and I think their scope should be considered separately
- Lin Clark
  - maybe we can move forward about whether there is disagreement about any of the proposed interfaces
- Kyle Brown
  - I was wondering if it was possible for Joe/Mossaka to put together an overview of these, the backing implementations, competing proposals, and so on
- Mossaka
  - https://github.com/deislabs/spiderlightning/blob/main/docs/primer.md lists the interfaces
- Dan Gohman
  - http seems new and an expansion of scope
- Lin Clark
  - ok, we can move forward with the poll following the presentation on those capabilities
- David Justice
  - I see small worlds building up into larger worlds
  - this world is closer to cloud applications world
  - i would hope we can move towards a more agnostic point of view
- Kyle Brown
  - i’m curious to seeing this proposed after these interfaces are independently standardized
- Luke Wagner
  - think there’ll be an incremental path forward here
  - like to think of those other proposals as opportunities rather than competitors
- Mossaka
  - custom pluggable functions can be ignored
- Kevin Hoffman	
  - is figuring out the names separate from deciding whether or not things are in scope
- Piotr Sikora
  - there are a fair amount of overlaps
- Andrew Brown
  - my underlying concern is that I would like to see differences between those previously existing proposals to be figured out
- Lin Clark
  - consensus poll for each of these individually
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: distributed lock service (advances)
- Kevin Hoffman
  - if things are so ubiquitous that we can agree on a common abstraction, distributed locks are not very high on that list
  - maybe this is a design concern
  - but seems like it is a much less agreed-upon contract
- David Justice
  - going to be many different contracts and implementors
  - there may be a lifetime where an app goes from a shared interface for the behavior to a more specific one
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: key value store (advances)
- Piotr Sikora
  - the considerable overlap with previous proposals, but it’s still in scope
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: sql database (advances)
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: message queue (advances)
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: pub sub (advances)
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: blobstore (advance)
- Piotr Sikora
  - what’s the different between blobstore and kvstore and do we need both? on the interface level
- David Justice
  - maybe not at the interface level. semantics get closer to fs semantics
- Piotr Sikora
  - so why not use the posix fs api
- Luke Wagner
  - a smaller, tighter API. also more immutable
- Piotr Sikora
  - readonly files also have to be supported
  - not strongly opposing but it seems premature
- Lin Clark
  - can we resolve after we iterate on the design, and have this concern block advancement to phase 2
- mossaka
  - I really want to hear feedback on these storage layers
  - there are two ways you can go, more granular and then more higher-level storage management
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: runtime config (advanced)
- Piotr Sikora
  - we already have environment variables in WASI preview 1
- Luke Wagner
  - as part of preview 2 that’s being factored, and so hopefully that facet can be shared
- Steve Schoettler
  - competing goals of standardization
  - reduce fractured and duplicate efforts across the industry
  - on the other hand, sometimes want competition to see how things evolve
  - in the place where wasm and wasi is today, having a major evolution between preview1 and preview2, how do we decide if it is too soon to stabilize certain ABIs
- Lin Clark
  - Poll: http server
- Piotr Sikora
  - overlap with proxy
  - grpc just a layer on top of http, do we need it?
- Lin Clark
  - out of time
  - moving ones besides grpc and http forward
