![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the November 24th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: November 24th, 5pm-6pm UTC (November 24th, 9am-10am Pacific Standard Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. POLL: Advancing [Numeric Values in WAT Data Segments Proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wat-numeric-values/blob/master/proposals/wat-numeric-values/Overview.md) to Phase 2 (Ezzat Chamudi) [10 min]
1. Closure



## Meeting Notes

### Opening

#### Attendees
Derek Schuff

Paolo Severini

Zalim Bashorov

Thomas Lively

Alon Zakai

Asumu Takikawa

Luke Imhoff

Luke Wagner

Gergely

Sergey Rubanov

Jay Phelps

Ross Tate

Sven Sauleau

Nick Fitzgerald

Eric P

Nabeel Al-Shamma

Nicholas Yang

Ioanna Dimitriou

Sam Clegg

Conrad Watt

Petr Penzn

Rich Winterton

Heejin Ahn

Ezzat Chamudi

Franics McCabe

J Birch

Daniel Wirtz


### Adoption of the agenda

Thomas seconds

### Proposals and discussions

#### POLL: Advancing [Numeric Values in WAT Data Segments Proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wat-numeric-values/blob/master/proposals/wat-numeric-values/Overview.md) to Phase 2 (Ezzat Chamudi) [10 min]

EC: [presenting](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1zbYsfvDu76afrpeZ0xS_W8dvXAt9Bke_9MxgL4MR6dc/edit?usp=sharing)

FM: There are FP numbers that don’t have a decimal representation. What should we do about those?

EC: In the proposal, if the number is out of range...

FM: what i mean is, there are numbers that you can’t represent accurately

CW: In the text format, there are already text literals for arbitrary floating point numbers. Will do the same here.

EC: we’ll use the same representation of i32.const or stores, etc

PP: If you can represent those numbers now, you should be able to still do it because the string format is not going away.

NA: should we consider options for 256 or 512 SIMD?

TL/PP: It seems a bit premature since there’s no proposal for those now. We can always extend this as part of that future proposal.

CW: we’ll have to do that regardless of whether this proposal is adopted.

SR [in chat]: Are numbers always signed?

EC: No, the text format already handles signed and unsigned integers.

CW: just to be clear, this is the existing notation in the text format for the const instruction, nothing new needs to be defined.

DS: Any objections?

<silence>

SC: Would we imagine this would mostly be used for hand-written wat files or would compilers produce this as well?

EC: there are no changes in the binary. Engines wouldn’t change.

SC: I guess I meant tools that produce WAT, like WAT disassemblers, etc.

EC: not sure.

CW: they’d probably have to use the original raw form. If you go from binary to text you don’t have the original format. If you have the tool producing from a higher-level, you could imagine using this.

EC: Regarding the binary format, the binary section does not contain any data about the interpretation.

LI: Suggestion for disassemblers: Default to the back-compat method, but there should be options in tools for changing the format.

EC: that’s a good idea, but it doesn’t affect the spec.

LI: yeah, it's just good for disassemblers

EC: (shows demo in VS code using wasp, when disassembling back to text, it goes back to the string format)

CW: Vote?


F: 15
SF: 5

### Informational things

EP: W3C has a new patent policy for living documents. Basically means you get to circulate candidate recommendations as long as you want without publishing versioned documents. Advantage of new process is that companies have to commit to patent obligations earlier than in the old process. Has already been agreed to by W3C advisory committee. Cost to us is that representatives have to go click a button to opt in. This is technically a WG matter.

TL: what’s the “user-visible” change. There won’t be a versioned spec?

EP: we have the option of staying on one “Version” for a long time if we want. It’s similar to how they do the HTML spec.

LI: one thing that’s come up before is that we restructured some of the URLs so that academics writing papers can link to particular versions. Would that still be possible, to specify a version that way?

EP: This doesn’t have to change anything because we can choose not to partake of the living document path. Every publication has its own URL anyway, so even though there’s no major/minor number, there are still unique URLs to cite.

LI: that covers my concern, thanks

RT: as someone in that community: with that model where you update some number everytime some proposal goes to phase 4, as long as there’s a unique doc or URL, it should be fine.

EP: any other concerns, about practicality or patents?

LI: have there been other things that have gone from versoined to living? Since there’s not that clear cutoff anymore?

EP: it’s new, but others who are migrating to the new framework include CSS and several other working groups. Whether they will use a living doc is up to them, they don’t have to. 

LI: how does living doc change early proposal adoption and proving compatibility? E.g. JS adds stuff a lot, would we have to be more careful about breaking changes?

EP: i think the contract around breaking changes is pretty much the same.

TL: I don’t think there would be any change to our process doc up until phase 5, when things get published. So the CG wouldn’t change.

ID: Is there any link where we can read about these policies?

EP: Probably...

DS: I know the patent policy has been up for a while.

EP: Is it ok if this is member-only?

DS: If anything is member-only, I can just send it to Ioanna or other interested parties. To be clear, this is WG member-only?

EP: Any W3C member account.

DS: That’s the one you have to pay for, right?

EP: Yes. Will send Derek email to forward on.

TL: what’s the timeline where we have to decide on opting into the living doc process?

EP: it’s easier if we do it by december 7

DS: Other things:

RT: New SOIL seminar coming up. Adam from UBC on a type system for guaranteeing that all accesses into linear memory are in bounds. They want feedback on practical considerations on what would make this practical for generators and engines.

DS: Last thing: Zoom is now requiring passwords or waiting rooms, so we wanted a new meeting anyway. I will change the calendar invite with a new URL with the password embedded.



