![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the March 20/21 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: March 20, 6:00–7:00 UTC (March 20, 11PM–12AM Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: JF Bastien
    - Email: jfbastien@apple.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email JF Bastien to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. Future in-person meeting: [hosted by Fastly in San Francisco in April](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/main/2018/CG-04.md)
    1. Should we meet at [TPAC](https://www.w3.org/2018/10/TPAC/Overview.html) 22 - 26 October 2018 in Lyon, France
    1. HTML serialization of WebAssembly.Module objects (Daniel Ehrenberg)
       * https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/711
       * Where should this be in the process?
    1. [Rename memory instructions](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/issues/627)
       * Using "mem": https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/649
       * Using "memory": https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/720
    1. [Mutable Globals proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/mutable-global) update
       * Implementation status?
       * [Add WebAssembly.Global.toJson](https://github.com/WebAssembly/mutable-global/issues/1#issuecomment-363955362)?
    1. [Sign-extension operators proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/sign-extension-ops)
       * Implementations status?
    1. Subcommitees? - Discussion
       * Would CG subcommitees be useful for some topics like:
          * Exceptions
          * ES6 Modules
          * CSP
       * Do we need anything formal or would informal work?
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes


### Opening, welcome and roll call

1. Opening of the meeting
1. Introduction of attendees

#### Roll call

* Arun Purushan
* Ben Smith
* Brad Nelson
* David Jonsson
* Deepti Gandluri
* Derek Schuff
* Eric Holk
* Heejin Ahn
* JF Bastien
* Limin Zhu
* Luke Wagner
* Maher Jendoubi
* Michael Ferris
* Michael Holman
* Oleksandr Skachkov
* Pat Hickey

### Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)

*JF volunteers*

### Adoption of the agenda

*Luke seconds*

### Proposals and discussions

#### Review of action items from prior meeting.

Skip.

#### Future in-person meeting

[hosted by Fastly in San Francisco in April](https://github.com/WebAssembly/meetings/blob/master/main/2018/CG-04.md)

[Register here](https://goo.gl/forms/UKV8HNnXGDbsvHmq2).

#### TPAC

Should we meet at [TPAC](https://www.w3.org/2018/10/TPAC/Overview.html) 22 - 26 October 2018 in Lyon, France

Yes, let’s do one day with the Working Group and invite CG members and other groups.

*AI*: JF to privately reply to [Coralie's email about this](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-webassembly/2018Mar/0003.html).

#### HTML serialization of WebAssembly.Module objects

*Daniel Ehrenberg*

* https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/711
* Where should this be in the process?

*Punt to next meeting*

#### [Rename memory instructions](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/issues/627)

*Ben Smith*

* [Using "mem"](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/649)
* [Using "memory"](https://github.com/WebAssembly/spec/pull/720)

Concern about “mem” versus “memory”, consistency, how descriptive, etc. Not very common opcodes. We might later add fill / zero / copy. Other instructions are already longer, and so are the section names.

Unanimous consensus to go with “memory”.

#### [Mutable Globals proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/mutable-global) update

*Ben Smith*

* Implementation status?
* [Add WebAssembly.Global.toJson](https://github.com/WebAssembly/mutable-global/issues/1#issuecomment-363955362)?

Now in beta Firefox, no bug report from users. Some issue with Emscripten with globals not being enumerable, when doing dynamic linking. Could add toJSON in the future.

Ben to work on mutable globals soon.

#### [Sign-extension operators proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/sign-extension-ops)

*Ben Smith*

* Implementations status?

Chrome implementation behind a flag. Also in Firefox in Nightly. There are tests in the proposal repo. Would be nice to have Emscripten implementation for just sign-extension (without threads). Could probably move to the next phase.

#### Subcommitees? - Discussion

*Brad Nelson*

* Would CG subcommitees be useful for some topics like:

  * Exceptions
  * ES6 Modules
  * CSP

* Do we need anything formal or would informal work?

We’re getting bigger features. Would it make sense to have optional CG meetings for people interested in these particular topics?

*AI:* JF to check with W3C what the process is, CC Brad and Eric Prud'hommeaux.

Do we want mailing lists? How do we organize? GitHub issues? Video chats? Sub-group chair (should those be the champions)? How do we establish charter for sub-groups? Notes, timing, other requirements?

#### Closure

