![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the May 29 video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: May 29, 4pm-5pm UTC (May 29, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: JF Bastien
    - Email: jfbastien@apple.com
    - Name: Ben Smith
    - Email: binji@google.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email JF Bastien or Ben Smith to sign
up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Review of action items from prior meeting.
    1. POLL: move [sign-extension ops proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/sign-extension-ops) to phase 4.
       * Implemented in FF and Chrome (others too?)
       * Spec and reference interpreter implementation complete
       * Core tests added
       * Toolchain support (status on separate flag from thread support in emscripten?)
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Roll call

* Andreas Rossberg
* Ben Smith
* Ben Titzer
* Dan Ehrenberg
* Dean
* Deepti Gandluri
* Derek Schuff
* Heejin Ahn
* Jacob Gravelle
* JF Bastien
* Lars Hansen
* Limin Zhu
* Lin Clark
* Luke Wagner
* Mark Miller
* Michael Holman
* Mike Rourke
* Sam Clegg
* Sergey Rubanov
* Sven Sauleau
* Tyler McMullen
* Ulrik Sorber
* Yury Delendik

### Opening, welcome and roll call

### Find volunteers for note taking

*JF Bastien volunteers*


### Adoption of the agenda

### Proposals and discussions

#### Review of action items from prior meeting

* TAG issue: secure context for WebAssembly: Dan was waiting to hear from Brad and Luke.

Luke: Still considering whether it... it seems like it should be in the MVP. What’s the future of this feature, is it partially implemented. Still discussing whether to remove. 

Dan: Not sure what to ask TAG since they suggested that group should decide.

Luke: There’s also the secure context blog post statement from Mozilla .... there won’t be a directive from Mozilla on high to slice into different flag bits. I wouldn’t spend time on that issue. We may have zero secure context issues at some point.

JF: It still would be useful to have guidance from TAG.

Dan: Not sure what TAG will say.

JF: If we’re OK with going with that, we can close out the issue.

Dan: I don’t know what to ask them, or what guidance they’ll give.

JF: When I’ve talked to TAG people they felt left out in the past, but now that we ask they’re not giving guidance... I want to avoid a situation like we’ve had in the past where we go in the wrong direction.

AI Dan: I’ll figure out what to do about indexeddb and modules.


* Implementation limits: Ben Titzer updated.

Ben: Posted an issue on GH last week.

Andreas on type reflection for JS API: anyone want to help push it forward? Probably won’t work on it soon.

Luke: at some point in the future, I will be. Not at top of priority list yet.


#### Sign-extension ops


* Implemented in FF and Chrome (others too?)
* Spec and reference interpreter implementation complete
* Core tests added
* Toolchain support (status on separate flag from thread support in emscripten?)

Derek: Flag is in LLVM, not sure it’s in emscripten yet

Ben: probably shouldn’t hold up the proposal. Lars pointed out that we can move it to phase 4 so it can be shipped.

Andreas: still concerned about naming convention

JF: phase 4 is more for VMs than text format

POLL: move [sign-extension ops proposal](https://github.com/WebAssembly/sign-extension-ops) to phase 4.

*Unanimous consent*

