# WebAssembly SIMD subgroup meeting on 2012-12-03

Attendees:

- Andrew Brown
- Anton Kirilov
- Deepti Gandluri
- Petr Penzin
- Richard Winterton
- Yuri Delendik

## Presentation on implemeting FP min and max using AVX512

Floating-point min and max operations in WebAssembly have the following
constraints:

- Signed zero handling (ex.: `min(0.0, -0.0) == -0.0`)
- `NaN` propagation (if either input is `NaN` output is `NaN`)
- `NaN` canonicalization

This makes x86-based implementations somewhat complicated, because SSE and AVX
instructions don't honor these properties. Solutions usually include:

- `cmpunordps` to detect `NaN` inputs
- `and` or `or` to handle signed zeros
- Performing operation twice to detect asymmetry
- Various forms of blending to put the result back together

The problem is that mitigations for the constraints above interact with each
other, making overall sequence more complicated. Removing even one of the
constraints will make the sequence much simpler. Using more registers may help
as well.

With AVX512:

- `vrange` has the desired behavior v.r.t signed zeros
- `vfixupimm` detects and corrects special values, but requires extra `mov`s
  and registers to set up fixup table
- Masked operations

We have tried `vrange` and `vrange` with conditional lane operations, on a
MobileNet demo:

- Both get close to theoretical maxiumum performance
- `vrange` combined with conditional ops wins

Implementation challenges:

- AVX512 detection and assembler changes
  - `cpuid`, encoding, tests, etc
- For conditional operations, mask register representation
  - Possible to hardcode if this is the only use

## Discussion

We have lost some notes here, below is the summary.

One of the questions for AVX512 implementation is its availability. It is
available in some client hardware, but is not very common. This makes finer
points, like mask register support even less important.

DG: AVX512 support isn't priority for V8 till it's more commonly available
in consumer hardware, work in progress for 256-bit registers/instructions

AB: What about Node.js and usage on the server?

DG: Node.js can serve as motivation, but we need to see benefits, the bar is
higher.

AB: Anton Kirilov, what is the current SVE availability?

AK: Both Qualcomm and MediaTek announced they will ship SoCs with SVE support.
