![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the June 27 video call of WebAssembly's Garbage Collection Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: June 27, 4pm-5pm UTC (June 27, 9am-10am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Fill out the form here to sign up if
it's your first time: https://forms.gle/JehrAB4gWbtHjybt9. The meeting is open
to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Status checks
    1. Discussion: final opcodes ([#372](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/pull/372))
        1. Type encodings ([#337](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/337))
    1. Discussion: extending type difference to heap types ([#381](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/381))
    1. Text format for final types ([#333](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/333))
1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

 - Thomas Lively
 - Ashley Nelson
 - Alon Zakai
 - Bruce He
 - Zalim Bashorov
 - Andreas Rossberg
 - Jakob Kummerow
 - Nick Fitzgerald
 - Manos Koukoutos
 - Igor Iakovlev
 - Luke Wagner

### Status Checks

TL: Implementing finally types in Binaryen. Because of the encoding differences, looks like it will take a two-step thing where we update Binaryen and then tell producers to update what they output and then update Binaryen again to have more restrive output. Also been working on spec documents. AR is putting out many PRs. I did a couple for bulk_array instructions. Hope to get that one landed today. Anything else?

AR: I think there is almost PRs for everything, but there hasn’t been progress for reviewing them unfortunately. The main bulk missing is the prose for execution. Other than that, it’s only small things for now.

TL: Conrad, when he emailed to say he couldn’t make the meeting, said he is working on reviewing the first of the PRs.

AR: The two on CW’s plate are the type system stuff so I think he should look at that. Of course the more eyes the better.

TL: Another development is I reserved a slot at the Sept 12 meeting to deliver an update on GC. If everything goes well, we can update that from an update to a vote.

NF: Wasmtime, almost done parsing and validating, babystep progress.

AR: Parsing you mean decoding or binary format or text format?

NF: Both. 

AR: Yes because of the opcode reshuffling we still have to do.

NF: Been working off the google doc so far.

### Discussion: final opcodes ([#372](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/pull/372))

TL: Disagreement about whether we should leave holes in the space or not. AR you were arguing it was useful holes for future extensions. BT was arguing not that useful. From my personal experience in SIMD, it didn’t turn out to be useful when we tried it out. Unclear how that generalizes. Seems minor and not worth a lot of debate time. We don’t have a critical mass but we could have a popularity vote on the GH issue since I don’t think it matters too much. Unless you feel more strongly AR?

AR: Not a big thing but what we did so far worked, so I don’t see a reason to deviate in this case. Especially since most of the counter arguments are not critically strong either. Doing what we did so far, not just jump around.

TL: We’re not close to taking up the second byte in the LEB encoding, are we? That was a consideration for SIMD as well. If we’re not close, I can’t say I care at all.

AR: Right, I think we’re not even ½ of that space, even with all the gaps. One thing I mentioned in the reply is that it’s not the gaps, it’s having nice groupings so if you have FB3 you know it’s an array instruction, which I find useful sometimes. Not a biggie.

TL: BT is not here, he felt the most strongly, so we shouldn’t proceed without checking in with him but i’m happy to go with your proposed encoding solution and see if we can get BT to go along with that, then close out the issue. Any other opinions on the final opcode numbering?

JK: Posted on GH, I’m also in favor of not having holes because I don’t see the point. All the reasons are totally minor, I agree it’s not a huge issue. Only thing that cares about the opcode design is the decoders and they don’t care if they are particularly in order. My biggest reason for not leaving holes is I think the likeness of the holes having appropriate size is very small. 8 x i31 instructions, if we happen to adopt the 8, there would be a natural place to stick them. If we are going to add 2 more instructions or 20 more instructions, it makes sense to just append them at the end. Very mild preference to just compact but not worth discussing at all. 

TL: Worse thing is we leave holes, and add more instructions later, and the holes are the wrong size, so then the new instructions have to go afterwards. Then we use the second LEB byte and we have a larger encoding. Even if these 8 x i31 instructions don’t fit in a hole, they go on the end and we’re still not close to the second LEB byte. I propose we do a non-binary poll with an option for “do not care” and see who feels what and how strong and try to resolve it quickly. 

###  Discussion: extending type difference to heap types ([#381](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/381))

TL: Related issue about heap-type indices. Ryan isn’t here, he was concerned about the types being counter-intuitive. We can skip the discussion since Ryan isn’t here.

AR: Should we move the previous one right away? 337 type opcodes one.

TL: Right, okay, yes. We can just close it now? Great. I just closed it. Great progress. Anything else folks want to discuss? This was every open issue I could find on our bug tracker. Not much left.

AR: Thanks for your help in the spec? Do you plan to do the validation? Should be fairly straightforward.

TL: I’ll take care of that. There is also extending the name section for field names. I’m happy to take a look at those as well. Maybe I’ll edit the big laundry list in the spect to note that I’m working on it.

AR: I think so, the name section would be, there is a group of appendices, you can just add an item there.

TL: I still have a bunch of work to do in Binaryen, but I’ll finish up the bulk array operations and finish up any other stuff I can.

AR: Field names I didn’t think of that but that’s another thing.

TL: Check out the list of issues, there are a few lists of issues which aren’t done. Writing down somewhere the embedder is not allowed to create impossible values like cycles of immutable references. We have few other issues like that.

AR: I forgot there is one other non-minor section still missing which is the soundness appendix but that’s blocked on CW reviewing the validation. That would go there because it ties into the notion of valid store I think would basically forbid a store that forms cycles in impossible ways.

TL: I’m not sure there are many people who read the soundness appendix. Should we put it somewhere else also?

AR: Yeah, I think we should put a note somewhere. The only place it really matters is in the axiomatization function calls. That defines the host function can only extend the store in valid and legal ways. And that’s where it would formally end up in. But we can put a note there as well. I don’t know what that section is saying informally right now. 

TL: Ok, sounds good. Anything else? Short meeting, we are running out of issues to discuss, so it’s a good thing. See you.

### Text format for final types ([#333](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/333))

Ryan not present, so deferring this discussion.
