![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the March 21 video call of WebAssembly's Garbage Collection Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: March 21, 4pm-5pm UTC (March 21, 9am-11am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Fill out the form here to sign up if
it's your first time: https://forms.gle/JehrAB4gWbtHjybt9. The meeting is open
to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Status checks
        1. Resolving cast annotation issues
        1. Bulk array operations
    1. Discussion: Implementation-defined limits ([#335](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/335))
    1. Discussion: Text format ([#333](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/333))
        1. Type definition abbreviations
        1. Dependent field names
        1. Instruction names
    1. Discussion: Field names in names section ([#193](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/193))
1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

- Thomas Lively
- Sergey Rubanov
- Zalim Bashorov
- Francis McCabe
- Conrad Watt
- Nick Fitzgerald
- Manos Koukoutos
- Alon Zakai
- Jakob Kummerow
- Ilya Rezvov
- Adam Klein
- Ashley Nelson
- Deepti Gandluri
- Adam Klein
- Andreas Rossberg

### Status checks

TL: A bunch of little things on the agenda today. Status checks, Bulk array operations, I continue to work on the tests in Binaryen and have all the test infrastructure and have started writing and executing tests and finding bugs in my implementation. Hopefully it’ll be done by the end of this week or early next week. I’ll make a PR against the spec repo. Conrad, I know you said you’d work on the interpreter for that. I think the semantics I posted on the Issue haven’t changed, so whenever you have time to get started on that

CW: I should get to it at the end of this week.

TL: Perfect, sounds great. Thank you. Andreas has signed up to do the formal spec write up for that. I was hoping to check-in about resolving the cast annotation issues because we made those PRs a while ago adding the properties we want to maintain with type annotations, but we as far as I know we haven’t updated the proposal to reflect those properties. We’ve not added type annotations to the cast like we need to. Conrad, do you know anything more about whether Andreas plans to do that?

CW: I can pretend. Just to check, is there any idea that we might wavering on adding them or are we definitely adding these cast annotations?

TL: My understanding is the issue is settled, just need to update the documentation.

CW: I can poke Andreas on GH and tell him this is what we expect to be doing.

TL: I will take an action to poke him on GH. Great, would be good to close that. Any other status updates folks want to share before we move on?

### Discussion: Implementation-defined limits ([#335](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/335))

TL: Continuing our discussion of implementation defined limits. Last time we talked we considered mostly the subtyping depth limit and we talked about the different tradeoffs that we'd have if we made it very large we’d have to fall back to a more than constant time implementation. And if it’s too small, then it’s more limiting. I think based on the GH info we got from OCaml, it seems like consensus is leaning towards setting the initial limit to be 63. If no one here wants to discuss that any further, then I think we can just call that final and make a PR and close this issue. Does anyone have any objection to setting the limit to 63 or have any comments about any of the other limits in this issue?

CW: I know I keep banging the drum, but when I last looked I didn’t see this, are we discussing limits on the stack size or the limits in initializer instructions?

TL: Yes, the last idea that came up was to set the max size of the global initializer as the same as the max size of a function.

CW: No problem with v8? I vaguely remember in global initializers you were allowed to have fewer consts on the stack at once or something like that.

JK: I’m not sure I don’t think we have an intentional lower limit. It might be that the implementation results in an unintentional lower limit when you run out of stack space. It seems unlikely real code would run into that unless you’re writing something that stress tests initializers. Even if there is a lower limit, it’s probably easier to fix it there than in functions because we evaluate initializers with an interpreter so that would be easier to change to some heap allocated data structure instead of using the real stack.

CW: I think I remember correctly, there was a limit in the thousands that isn’t present in functions. It’s probably not a big deal in the real world but if we want to close the loop totally, we may want to fix a limit that all the implementations know about.

TL: Can’t find where someone suggested the global initializer should be the same as the function body, so I’m either hallucinating or it’s in the last meeting notes. This discussion has dragged on quite a bit and we’re losing context. I think the proper next step is to make a PR with the actual proposed limits and if there needs to be further discussion, we can do so in a directed manner.

CW: In favor of forgetting this particular limit to get the others through the door. And we can come back to it.

JK: Programmatically, I expect that global initializers can have lwo instruction count and stack height. There is one use case, array.new_fixed but we have array.new_data and array.new_elem as well.

TL: But those aren’t constant expressions so you have to lazily initialize globals.

JK: Aside from that most global initializers are probably few instructions. Not strictly related to the GC proposal anyway.

TL: I’ll take an action item to make a PR with the limits we haven’t discussed in a while since that seems settled. We can focus the discussion on the remaining limits. Anything else someone wants to mention on limits? 

### Discussion: Text format ([#333](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/333))

TL: We haven’t talked about the text format in a long time. I had an open issue where I suggested a bunch of abbreviations for the text format to make type declarations simpler. I’ve implemented this in the new Binaryen text parser that I’m working on. There hasn’t really been any discussion about it. My guess is most people don’t care that much about what we do here in the text format. Then there is a separate issue of how symbolic field names should work. Is it a single global flattened namespace for fields or can you get dependent naming where it’s a two-level namespace so that two different structs can have fields with the same name? For debugging wasmGC it’s currently fairly primitive in that we are dependent on the text format to provide our debugging experience. We don’t add much on top of the text format. I would lean toward having the two-level namespace for struct field names to keep them shorter and unprefixed. Which would make the debugging as it exists today much better. This is strange because the text format is supposed to be just for tests but we do depend on it for providing a basic debugging experience. I think it’s worth doing.

CW: It’s true the text format was created for the “view source” use case so in that sense, it’s the same spirit.

JK: We allow functions to have locals with the same names, so an analogy with that, we should allow structs to have fields with the same name. One remaining issue about text format that we need Andreas to discuss is the discrepancy between the implementations and upstream docs about the “_canon” suffix on certain instructions. 

TL: Any other strong opinions about whether we should have the canon string in our allocation name? For the text format, it doesn’t affect semantics in any way.

ZB: It doesn’t affect semantics at all?

TL: Yeah, we should discuss this with Andreas. The quick version is the long term future once we add all the post-MVP things we want to add to wasm, then having canon in the names makes sense. So it’s mostly philosophical disagreements about how to name things I think. We can leave this aside for now. Andreas just showed up!

AR: Sorry, I forgot about the clock change. 

TL: Should have posted an issue notifying about that. Let’s backup. Do you have a status update on the spec test?

AR: No, I haven’t made any progress because I’m blocked on CW doing a review of the function ref proposal. 

CW: Oh God, this is the semantic type change. I’ll get that done this week, I’m sorry for forgetting. 

AR: Right now, it doesn’t matter because I won’t get to it for the next 3 weeks because of the OOPSLA deadline. But if I could start working on it after that, that would be great. Other than that, I don’t expect any particular surprises there. Most is straightforward as far as the spec is concerned. Biggest part is the type recursion and all that. That and precise language.

TL: We were just talking about the text format. In particular, this issue (linked above) which mentions the abbreviations I proposed for type definitions and also the two-level namespace for struct fields. Just before you joined Jakob had made a connection between struct fields and local names, where we support multiple functions having locals of the same name across functions and we could use the same for structs. And I was saying our debugging was heavily dependent on the text format, so having the names and being able to share them with people would be helpful.

AR: I don’t think this is similar to locals at all because they are really local. this would be a new thing. Symbolic names so far. There is no such thing as dependent lookup at all. This would be a slight complication to the whole symbol resolution. The other concern is that we if we ever want to leave the desire open to potentially move type annotations then this would not be future proof for that. This would navigate us into a dead end with respect to removing type annotations. At least in the text format, we would need hacks, it’s not clear what an elegant solution would be for that.

FM: Why does having local struct names affect removing type annotations?

AR: Because then you have no syntactic way of knowing which scope to look them up in. The type annotation tells you lookup in this type definition to look up, but if you don't have that, you can’t do it. That is not how the symbolic names work right now, they are purely syntactic, you don’t need type info to resolve them and I’d like to keep it like that because otherwise you have muddling of the phases. 

TL: Which phases?

AR: Purely a parsing thing, Sugar during parsing wouldn’t work anymore if you make it dependent on type information. You’d have to have in the spec a specification form of AST with symbolic names and typing rules that tell you how to transform that in the AST without names and things like that. So significantly more complicated.

TL: I appreciate it would complicate the text format to do this. But I think there is real value, because we have no plans to do anything better than display text format in dev tools. You get that or source maps, your choice. No plan to do anything richer. Actually making this slightly more readable has a real devEx impact for the foreseeable future. 

AR: Isn’t that the job of the name annotations actually, the name section. 

TL: Yes.

AR: So then it doesn’t have to be directly related to what we do in the text format then.

TL: When you go from binary to text, the names of the sections says what names to use in the text format, but it still needs to be valid in the text format.

AR: But you could just automatically prefix them if you want to have a valid output then that would be very trivial

TL: But you have these fully qualified Java names to start anyway, so if you prefix your field names with the giant fully qualified text names, there is no way you can read

CW: No way to disambiguate is to append an underscore or something to the second one.

AR: Lowkey ways of resolving this I think. Because of what I said earlier, if we ever wanted to introduce annotated instructions with field names, and I think the only way to make that work would be to require in the text format still putting the type annotation there. Drop it from the binary format but not the text format for these instructions at least. So in that case, you would still have the same notation overhead that you’re complaining about. You’re not really getting rid of that in that case.

TL: New version of get and set instructions that don’t have the type annotations would still have the class name and the field name in the text format. So having dependent naming lets you have your instruction, class name and field name, without having to repeat the class name as a prefix of the field name. 

CW: Do we already require a type derivation when going from Binary to text?

AR: If you round trip, you forget the symbolic names anyway. This is only an issue for symbolic names

TL: They get round tripped through the name section in the binary format.

CW: That seems like a problem for this vision. 

TL: I don’t think so, because the unannotated instructions for the struct.get and struct.set would be different opcodes. So you’d know how to round trip that to the binary format. You would need to track the types to emit the right text, and that would be an in-our-faces consequence of removing the principle type properties, which we would have to do to add these instructions.

AR: Seems like an entangling of concerns in a way.

CW: Is it definitely not a viable solution in the case that the name section has duplicate fields to append a disambiguation symbol like a little hex suffix?

TL: It’s possible but every time we do that our devEX gets worse. And it’s quite bad already.

JK: Decoding a name section becomes a lot more complicated because you can’t just do one off lookups to get one field name of a struct, you have to decode the whole thing and store them in dictionaries instead of simple arrays just to check for duplicates in the names

AR: My feeling is regarding tooling, you are going to buy yourself some pain one way or another. 

TL: For Binaryen, and this is not universal, we have all the type information anyway. It wouldn’t matter for us.

AR: In general, I like to minimize ambiguity and that would be if you don’t have dependencies you need to resolve. Seems simpler on this level and having something more user friendly I’d have as a tooling concern, especially since this isn’t a user facing. This isn’t a language people want to code in.

TL: v8 team in general can take an AI to check-in with our dev partners working on debugging and see how bad it would it be if we had to prefix or suffix these field names. They might say we can do this or this is the end of the world, in which case we can discuss further.

AR: SGTM.

TL: We’ll get user feedback there.

JK: j2wasm generates field names that contain the class name anyway, if i'm not mistaken then nothing would change for them, but I don’t know offhand about our other partners and what they are doing.

TL: If they are already doing that, that would simplify things so we’ll check-in.

AK: Kotlin folks are on the call if they want to say anything here.

ZB: I don’t remember the exact names we use for GC things. 

TL: Have you thought about the debugging experience in devTools at all. 

ZB: Definitely short names is much better for debugging we need to debug over ??? code. I have seen variables, it seems to me unusable for usual users. It just shows deep internal things of GC structures and I think usual users need something more high level. More inheriting? Hinting??? Variables showing deep structures is even deeper than original GC structures and sometimes it’s inconvenient to use.

IR: Generation for GC types could be beneficial could be helpful for non JS reflection if you want to show something readable on the JS side. When we read types of GC functions.

TL: We’re in this place where everything to make the devEx better, but the devEx is so bad anything we do for this particular problem might not matter too much.

ZB: I just looked at what Chrome shows for our code and it shows short names partly because we generated such names.

TL: Okay, let’s dig into details offline. Thanks Zalim that’s very helpful. Lines up with my understanding of how things are working. Andreas, those type definition abbreviations I had suggested in the issue, do those sound good or are you trying to minimize the # of abbreviations we have. What’s your take there?

AR: What are the abbreviations here? 

TL: Basically similar to the ones for parameters, where you can say parameter and list a bunch of them without each having to say parameter. This is the same thing for struct fields.

AR: I thought this was already the case, I’m pretty sure the interpreter already implements that by the very analogy you just mentioned.

TL: Might go further, you might not need to say field at all. I’ll write up examples in this issue so we can look at it and see. 

AR: Saying field is annoying in the same way parameter is annoying, irregularity if you want to bind the name if it’s there.

TL: A lot to write

AR: I know, I’ve omitted from slides as well. That’s the only thing you suggested here? Otherwise it’s the straight syntax?

TL: pretty much

AR: I think that matches what I implemented.

### Discussion: Field names in names section ([#193](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/193))

TL: JK had this issue that proposes that we add struct to the name sections. Thai is orthogonal but it’s just should we put them in the name section. I think the answer is yes. So the next step is the PR documenting so we can close the issue.

AR: I agree.

JK: The only logical wrinkle is there is an extended name proposal that has been asleep for years and we are deepening on that because they are occupying fields 4-10 and this would take the next. If GC ships before the extended name section. 

TL: I think we should do what we do for opcode prefixes. Whoever gets standardized first, gets the prefix. Ignore the extended const proposal and if they need to adjust their prefixes, that’s fine.

JK: We also implemented.

TL: Oh we implemented.

JK: I think we should assume it will be implemented already and work around it.

TL: Oh okay if it’s implemented 

AR: Coordinate with the author of that proposal and get the status. What do we do if it’s orphaned? Who is owning that?

TL: Andrew Scheidecker.

AR: Okay that’s orphaned. 

DG: v8 implementation we have looked at moving stuff around if it’s not merged, maybe that’s a thing we should consider doing.

NF: wasmtime implements the extended name section, fwiw

TL: We can reduce our implementation burden by not taking an opcode for that.

AR: Maybe whoever takes over the field names for extended consts, can take over the proposal. We need a new champion, not sure how we’ll make progress.

TL: JK can you do a PR documenting the extended names and field names

AR: Did you already do the status checks?

TL: Yes, wanted to talk to you about the cast annotations, do you want to do a PR to update that?

AR: I should do that.

TL: That would be great. *repeats bulk status update*

JK: Another logistical headsup is we're going to have to use new opcodes so they are different for cast annotations. We have some opcodes that were freed up from the last restructuring we did. So we can pick a consistent set of binary encodings that won’t clash. The opcode space will be cleaned up int he final reshuffling.

AR: If we do that, there will also be a time window when they are forced to break. Unless you move all your partners.

JK: We assume one breakage when everything is final. Between now and then, it has been working pretty great for that. It has been working to maintain backwards compatibility. In theory there would be a way to do that if we switched to a new prefix for a final wasmGC, that would be a new thing, but there would be a prefix for big proposals.

AR: Resolving FF for that kind of purpose, experimental namespace. Let’s not get into that. It makes sense.

*back to discussion about _canon in instruction names*

TL: None of the implementations use _canon. I dont know if you saw Andy Wingo's blogpost about compiling Scheme to wasm. He dedicates multiple paragraphs to the “ghost in the instruction set”. Has to get the history right and generates confusion. I think we should remove them, they are confusing. 

AR: I’m fine doing that. I should look at Andy’s post, I haven’t seen it.

JK: There isn’t much cost to having alias in the text format, so we can reintroduce _canon if needed in the future when there are other instructions that could create confusion.

AR: The problem is that would be the wrong way around, you don’t want to use up the current name.

CW: It seems like we have agreed to remove it, so let’s just be unhappy about it and let it happen.

TL: Anything else?
