![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the January 24 video call of WebAssembly's Garbage Collection Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: January 24, 5pm-6pm UTC (January 24, 9am-11am Pacific Time)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Fill out the form here to sign up if
it's your first time: https://forms.gle/JehrAB4gWbtHjybt9. The meeting is open
to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Discussion: Extern conversions as constant expressions ([#348](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/pull/348)) (5 minutes)
    2. Discussion: `br_on_cast` typing and when to use annotations ([#342](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/342), [#347](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/pull/347)) (15 minutes)
    3. Discussion: `array.copy` and friends ([#313](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/313)) (15 minutes)
    4. Discussion: Preparation for phase 4: spec documents and tests (15 minutes)
1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction of attendees

- Thomas Lively
- Conrad Watt
- Ben Titzer
- Rick Battagline
- Francis McCabe
- Asumu Takikawa
- Alon Zakai
- Luke Wagner
- Jakob Kummerow
- Ilya Rezvov
- Zalim Bashorov
- Matthias Liedtke
- Emanuel Ziegler
- Andreas Rossberg
- Aske Simon Christensen
- Deepti Gandluri


### Discussion: Extern conversions as constant expressions ([#348](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/pull/348)) (5 minutes)

TL: Summarizing issue. Any objections?

No objections.

### Discussion: `br_on_cast` typing and when to use annotations ([#342](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/342)

TL: Summarizing issue. We are happy with polymorphism over nullability in binaryen. Andreas, can you explain your objection?

AR: Nullability in polymorphism is fine, but it’s also polymorphic in the heap type. That makes analysis of code fragments without context more complicated. Why do we have annotations at all? To make typing simpler (not related to reference types) and also to simplify execution semantics, but we didn’t establish what precise properties we wanted to uphold. In particular it was argued that there is a fundamental difference between struct.get and something like a cast where the type details don’t need to be known. Want

TL: Two questions: heap type polymorphism? Principled design principle?

AR: “Return type” isn’t the right criteria because e.g. struct.set doesn’t return anything.

CW: My impression is that you could rephrase the typing rules to remove the polymorphism, since it only arises from trying to ensure that the top types match. 

AR: Right, but that determines the output type as well, so it’s polymorphic. We can 1) add a new annotation to cast, 2) refine our design principles, 3)...

TL: What if we do the thing that all the implementations want and take an action item to come up with a consistent rationale later?

BT: Would want to swing for the fences. What if we allow struct.get to specialize based on stack type as well?

AR: Objections.

ASC: I would like to understand the rules here. Br_on_cast null same as old br_on_null? If it validated under the old rules, why is it a problem under the new rules?

AR: Problem existed with old rules as well.

TL: The way we solved this for struct.get was to run code size experiments showing that the code size hit for the annotation was somewhat acceptable, then we just added the annotation. Could try the same thing here. Both annotations are and would be completely useless as far as Binaryen and V8 are concerned.

BT: Could annotations affect semantics in a future extension?

AR: No, it’s just a helper for validation and maybe execution.

ASC: Would we need to add an annotation to other instructions?

AR: Yes, would need to add annotations to all four general cast instructions.

TL: Unhappy if our go-to solution is to add annotations that no implementer wants.

AR: Agree, but unclear what the consistent rationale is.

TL: Can we agree on type sharpening today and defer the discussion on heap type polymorphism to the next meeting? That wouldn’t regress the state of the heap type polymorphism problem.

AR: Begrudging agree.

### Discussion: Preparation for phase 4: spec documents and tests 

TL: Andreas, do you want / need help writing tests?

AR: It’s all over the place. Complex things have more tests, but “obvious” things have fewer tests. Hard to say specifically where we are lacking. Would be helpful for implementers to add their own tests.

BT: I would be happy to merge some tests. Feature request for wast would be top-level variables.

AR: You can do that by wrapping state in a module.

BT: There are many tests that initialize a table, then call a method with a table index.

AR: Don’t think those would work with globals because the point of the table is that you don’t have full static type information…. Oh no, I think it makes sense.

BT: Would be convenient to write short tests with globals rather than tables.

AR: Would be nice to have a richer expression language. Missing type expressions.

TL: Great, will also take personal AI to check in on getting V8 tests upstreamed. Let’s take the discussion of richer assertions offline.

AR: Next steps for spec are to rebase tail calls. Conrad should review PR for typed function references.

TL: Asumu has volunteered to take the JS spec. Thanks, Asumu! Do we need to do anything for the Web spec?

AR: No, that shouldn’t be affected.

AT: There are also Web Platform Tests. I can work on those.

FM: You should coordinate with Ilya. He’s championing JS types now.

AR: What is the state of that?

IR: …

AR: The intersection will be interesting. Sequentializing is a good way to resolve conflict. Maybe we just continue in parallel.

TL: Agree, seems unlikely that both will be ready to merge at the same time. Let’s just let the first one win and update the other.

### Discussion: `array.copy` and friends ([#313](https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/313)) (15 minutes)

TL: These are a straight performance win, what would it take to get into MVP?


CW: Let’s do it!

ZB (chat): we also see perf benefit in K/Wasm.

AR: Would prefer to have all 3? Instructions.

TL: There are a lot of instructions possible if you think about it. Could copy between memory and arrays, for instance.

AR: Maybe let’s not do that but still have a complete set of instructions for arrays.

CW: As a compromise, could we reserve opcodes for the other two and commit only to array.copy for now?

AR: That’s extra complicated in terms of spec overhead.

BT: I agree with AR. Would be nice to have a complete set.

ASC: Dart would actually like to use the array-to-memory instructions.

CW: Could immediately spin up a post-MVP proposal with all the instructions including array.copy?

TL: Probably don’t want to wait for array.copy, but will check in with the team.

AR: Other thing is that I don’t want to write the spec, implement it in the interpreter, or write tests for this.

TL: We can do tests, but you reviewing us trying to do the spec might be more work for you.

AR: Ok I can do the spec.

CW: I can do the interpreter.

TL: Great, thanks. Don’t go off and do a bunch of work just yet, but let’s plan to commit to this direction soon.
