![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the April 9th video call of WebAssembly's Community Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: April 9th, 16:00-17:00 UTC (09:00-10:00 PDT, 18:00-19:00 CEST)
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Send an email to the acting [WebAssembly CG chair](mailto:webassembly-cg-chair@chromium.org)
to sign up if it's your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Announcement: Nominating Thomas Lively as CG co-chair (Deepti Gandluri, 5 mins)
    1. SpecTec update (Andreas Rossberg & collaborators, 40 minutes)
        1. Repo: https://github.com/Wasm-DSL/spectec/tree/main/spectec
    1. Phase 3 poll for ESM Integration (Guy Bedford, 15 minutes)
        1. Repo: https://github.com/webassembly/esm-integration
        1. Slides: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1iZzoRE3LhlMuJz8-npW5Kc9GnUydVI6PPj8lgPuwdi4/edit?usp=sharing
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

*None*

### Schedule constraints

*None*

## Meeting Notes

### Attendees
 - Yuri Iozzelli
 - Derek Schuff
 - Dongjun Youn
 - Sukyoung Ryu
 - Kirk Shoop
 - Fedor Smirnov
 - Andrew Brown
 - Yury Delendik
 - Ilya Rezvov
 - Thomas Lively
 - Jae Hyun Lee
 - Jeff Charles
 - Emanuel Ziegler
 - Sam Clegg
 - Conrad Watt
 - Ben Visness
 - Paolo Severini
 - Ryan Hunt
 - Daniel Hillerström
 - Deepti Gandluri
 - Zalim Bashorov
 - Robin Freyler
 - Nick Fitzgerald 
 - Jakob Kummerow
 - Andreas Rossberg
 - Michael Ficarra
 - Guy Bedford
 - Keith Winstein
 - Manos Koukoutos
 - IS
 - Johnnie Birch
 - Brendan Dahl
 - Matthias Liedtke
 - Nuno Pereira
 - Francis McCabe
 - Richard Winterton
 - Daniel Lehmann
 - Thomas Trenner
 - Chris Woods
 - Julien Pages
 - Sam Lindley


### Proposals and discussions

#### Announcement: Nominating Thomas Lively as CG co-chair (Deepti Gandluri, 5 mins)

Deepti will be stepping down as CG co-chair (but will continue participating in the CG) and is nominating Thomas Lively as a new co-char (to continue with Conrad and Derek). Anyone who has comments, questions, or concerns should contact the chairs before the next meeting.


#### SpecTec update (Andreas Rossberg & collaborators, 40 minutes) [slides](main/2024/presentations/2024-04-09-rossberg-spectec.pdf)

Repo: https://github.com/Wasm-DSL/spectec/tree/main/spectec

BV (chat): When we say "prose", do we mean the sort of prose in the validation and execution sections?

AR: Yes, and the auxiliary definitions, and other stylized pieces that we have in the spec.

[spectec paper](https://people.mpi-sws.org/~rossberg/papers/spectec1.pdf)

FM (chat): What steps do you expect to happen after CG sign off?

AR: Getting the spec conversion to the point where it’s complete enough where it makes sense, where we’ve converted whole chapters and not just random bits, e.g all of execution, 
binary format as well. Rendering is good enough to replace hand-written spec.

Also we want to have the tool mature enough and UX and docs good enough that other people can use it.

FM: suppose we said yes, what would happen right after that?

AR: we are still committed to continue working on this for a long time. We have research ideas and other groups are looking into this as well. We won’t necessarily do everything they want but it has a broad enough interest .

CW: there wouldn't be an immediate switchover. This is about a statement of intent so we can justify continuing to work on it, and then at some point later we’d want to officially look at the product and decide when to integrate it.

FM: Ok. Follow-on. Because it won't be a bit-for-bit replacement of the existing spec, will we need additional process at the W3C level?

AR: the document itself is very incremental. We’ve set up the infrastructure so you can substitute things piecemeal. The overall doc is basically the same modulo minor layout, but it doesn’t replace the whole document, but only how pieces are generated. So I don’t think W3C should care.

CW: In particular as long as we can generate a doc that satisfies their criteria in terms of indices, TOC, etc. it shouldn't be a problem.

AR: from their perspective it’s purely editorial changes. We already have quite a bit of a toolchain to generate a W3C document and this is just another step.

MF (chat): since this is entirely editorial, I would say it should be up to editor discretion whether to switch toolchains

AR: not necessarily. It’s an investment if we add something nontrivial to the toolchain and it will require investment in the toolchain. If it’s injected into the critical path of maintaining the document it also affects not just the editor but also proposal authors and others downstream. But also this is not a dead end. We can generate a document and if the whole toolchain breaks down, we could take the output and continue to work on it. Not ideal but not too different from what we have now.

ZB: Would it be possible to combine in-progress proposals automatically? E.g. generate an interpreter from in-progress proposal, e.g. if someone depends on more than one in-progress proposal it would be great if you could generate the interpreter that they could use.

AR: I don't think there's any magic there. If there are multiple proposals, it will be some work to combine them.

ZB: when there are interactions, one proposal depends on another, so the the last one could define some override rules or something, we could find ways to make it easier.

AR: right now the structure of the spec files is a bit monolithic. One thing I'd like to add is an include capability so you can modularize a little bit and make it easier to combine stuff. But it doesn’t solve the general problem in principle. E.g. you still have to resolve when you have diamonds. But it could still help with that; but it’s not a problem we are trying to solve with this, and I don’t really know how to solve it.

CW: the situation with conflicting proposals is particularly bad now because you have to merge latex. Hopefully this syntax will be better but there could still be conflicts.

AR: the more annoying conflicts are in the prose, and it gets really bad. Part of this is with rst, you have to renumber things, and makes big conflicts. Hopefully we can go to auto-numbering with the tool.

TL (chat): Andreas Rossberg, process-wise, I think a normal consensus vote at the F2F would be sufficient as a formal declaration of intent to adopt the new infrastructure. No need for the phase process. However, it's important that stakeholders can do due diligence before the vote. I'll take a look at the paper and file an issue with questions and documentation suggestions soon.

(three thumbs up reacts)

### Phase 3 poll for ESM Integration (Guy Bedford, 15 minutes)

Repo: https://github.com/webassembly/esm-integration

GB: I’ll just cover updates since the last presentation

.. presenting

CW: you used the term “cyclic module record”:  is there any case where wasm could have to deal with dependency cycles?


GB: no, it refers to ECMA spec terminology, it doesn’t refer to “cyclic” in the way you’re talking about.

CW: this was the criteria we informally agreed on in the previous meeting, and we do seem to have met this.

GB: the implementation of the module shims is passing the web platform tests (this was deemed more relevant than having core wasm tests).

SC: question about source imports: does that allow us to still get the benefits of instantiate-streaming?

GB: yes, compile streaming, but we've moved to sync instantiation.

AR: if we needed to annotate imports in wasm, could we use a custom section to do that?'

GB: Right, in JS we have import attributes, string-to-string maps.

Vote to advance ESM integration to phase 3

SF: 3
F: 15
N: 7
A: 0
SA: 0

Poll passes, ESM integration to phase 3.