![WebAssembly logo](/images/WebAssembly.png)

## Agenda for the 2024-02-14 video call of WebAssembly's Working Group

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: 2024-02-14 at 16:00-17:00 UTC *( February 14th, 8am-9am PST )*
- **Location**: *on calendar invite to registered attendees*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Derek Schuff, Luke Wagner

### Registration

If you are a Working Group member no registration is required.

If you are a Community Group member who would like to observe, please register here: https://goo.gl/forms/HD2kLCM0iSKk7AVl1

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
See the calendar invite for link.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Next steps for releasing Wasm 2.0
1. Closure

## Agenda items for future meetings

None.

### Schedule constraints

None.

## Meeting Notes

### Attendees

 - Mike Smith
 - Luke Wagner
 - Andreas Rossberg
 - Derek Schuff
 - Zalim Bashorov
 - Ms2ger
 - Thomas Lively

### Agenda items

#### Next steps for releasing Wasm 2.0

AR: It’s been quite a while since we met, and we should push on this and try to create some AIs to get it moving

We have a RC in the right format, don’t we? I think It’s about the process. We could update the document with some fixes, it should be possible to rebuild it. I think the pipeline is functional, but I think the blocker is the process. I think we went through part of this process but don’t recall the details.
Someone will need to figure out where we are in the process and what needs to be done next.

AR: Notes from last time: one blocker was lack of a charter, but we have that resolved. Last time we talked about publication was March.

DS: was there tooling missing to get the right W3C format?

AR: Eric put something together that I’ve seen, but I thought that we had put together the first RC for 2.0 without it. Working draft is https://www.w3.org/TR/wasm-core-2/

MS: I can look at what’s needed. I looked at it once in the past, I don’t recall what was done before. 

AR: There is a bikeshed version in CI, I think it should be working?

MS: Does that work?

AR: Not sure about all the front matter but it’s what we used to build everything before, and it’s functional.

TL: It’s https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/bikeshed/

AR: that’s essentially an up-to-date version of what’s in the main repo. The working draft had a couple things in the front of the HTML.

MS: that should be a matter of just tweaking some bikeshed stuff. With the right flags, it’s capable of producing something that works for the W3C. I can look at what would be needed for that. Process-wise, the other thing is… that there’s nothing that really needs to be done. The process would be that the chairs ask the WG for a decision and they would agree and have a vote, request for consensus. We don’t really need that because it’s been published as a FPWD, so you don’t need to ask the WG for a decision about that, you can publish what’s there. We should publish a dated version. Everytime we publish in TR space, it gets a URL with the date, e.g. https://www.w3.org/TR/2022/WD-wasm-core-2-20220419/ the others are basically just symlinks to a dated version. So I can work on that.

AR: so we don’t need a vote?

MS: the next time we’d need a vote would be to go to CR.

AR: whatever makes progress, we should do.

MS: We could also set up some auto-publishing so that everytime a change is made to the spec, the CI runs, we could push a change to the TR version, so we’d never need to do this part again, until we want to move to CR. So I can look at that too

AR: so that would be a GH action on the spec repo?

MS: yes, we have tooling for that, it’s just a matter of pushing some buttons.

AR: that would be good, we basically assume that the live doc that gets pushed is like a live standard already, so pushing that to the W3C side would be even better.

MS: Yeah, I generally tell people not to use the TR versions because they aren’t up to date. But regardless of what we do here, we should still say that, really the only purpose is to make it look more official for the W3C. 

AR: is that what the evergreen process is for?

MS: yeah that was part of the idea. But unless every group does it consistently, it can still be unreliable. So we still generally tell implementers  not to use versions in TR space unless the date is recent. But even then, the version in github, or what you work on that is the source. But it won’t be a problem once we get auto-publishing.

AR: what we have on github.io now is pretty much the same because we are merging new stuff into a 3.0 branch. Butdoes this mean the evergreen model isn’t good?

MS: one problem was that search engines index and the TR versions always show up higher than the github versions despite being less up to date. So people always find it, so the best thing about the evergreen is getting the TR versions up to date. That was the hope, but it’s inconsistent, there’s no way a random person can know that the TR version for any given spec is the up to date one. So the biggest problem is still that we have implementers that show up and say I’m trying to figure out this thing in the spec but they’re looking at a really old version and they’ve wasted time. So we wanted to avoid that, and it still happens.

AR: all the more reason to push a new version ASAP then and move the process along.

MS: the other part that’s nice is that it used to be that WGs, once you published a CR, you had to do more process steps to publish a rec. But you don’t have to do that now, you can just stay in CR and not need to move further. So that’s what we should do once we have the CR.
So I’ll look at this, I agreed to do it a while back, but haven’t yet. I thought that it maybe wasn’t working but if it’s working in CI, then we should be good.

AR: let us know what you need from us

MS: i shouldn't need much from the group. I’ll need to talk to some folks on the W3C side.

AR: and the next step is a vote to move to CR?

MS: yeah for W3C process that’s next

AR: are there constraints or prerequisites?

MS: none that I can recall for entering CR, other than the normal procedure for getting a WG decision. The process doesn’t mandate details, normally you send a message to the WG list, tell people that we’re asking for statements of agreement to move to CR, and that silence is agreement. People can make statements, but after a week we publish. After that, for moving out of CR, we need to demonstrate that the spec has had wide review and multiple implementations. We have that but it means specifically all features in the version that we want to move forward. But that’s moving out of CR if we want to do that.

LW: so our evergreen plan would just stay as CR and update in place. Would the thing we publish still say 2.0? Or 2? And at some point we just switch to 3?

MS: that’s up to the group to decide what we want to title. We have these “short names” currently wasm-core-2 but the title doesn’t have to be versioned. THer are a range of opinions about versioning. If you find value in distinguishing between versions and saying this is 2 or 3, then you can, or just dont’ version the title and say this is the “current” spec.

AR: I think versions are helpful. Initially we didn’t have a version and people complained about that.

MS: yeah there are opinions, some people will complain if there is a version, just depends on how you want to balance.

LW: would it be the case in practice that 2 will have everything right up to but not including 3, i.e. including the last thing we merge until we change to 3?

AR: depends on how we merge. My plan is, we have a bunch of new features, I thought maybe we should do a 3.0 with that, where we do a big bang to 3.0 once we switch to that branch. And we maybe can iterate on that afterward. At least thats what i had in mind.

LW: and 2 is a big atomic thing. And then we can switch to 3, decide if we want minor versions, etc

AR: so our current goal is to do CR, Mike will look at the publication, what else?

DS: I will look at next steps and notifying people for the CR, etc.

AR: let me know if you need help with the doc.

MS: yeah we’ll want to make the formatting tweaks automatic if they aren’t already.

